Page 1:


Page 2:


Page 3:
JOE NAVARROAn Ex-FBI Agent’s Guide 
to Speed- Reading PeopleWHAT EVERY
BODY
IS SAYING
with Marvin Karlins, Ph.D.FBI Special Agent (Ret.)

Page 4:
T o my grandmother, Adelina, whose withered 
hands lovingly molded a child into a man.
—JOE NAVARRO
T o my wife, Edyth, who has blessed me with her love 
and taught me what it means to be a caring human being.
—MARVIN KARLINS

Page 5:
CONTENTS
  Foreword: I See What You’re Thinking 
  Acknowledgments 
 ONE   Mastering the Secrets of Nonverbal 
Communication 1
 TWO  Living Our Limbic Legacy  21
 THREE   Getting a Leg Up on Body Language:
Nonverbals of the Feet and Legs 53
 FOUR   T orso Tips: Nonverbals of the
T orso, Hips, Chest, and Shoulders 85
 FIVE  Knowledge Within Reach: Nonverbals of the Arms 109
 SIX   Getting a Grip: Nonverbals of the 
Hands and Fingers 133vi
x

Page 6:
 SEVEN  The Mind’s Canvas: Nonverbals of the Face 165
 EIGHT  Detecting Deception: Proceed with Caution!  205
 NINE  Some Final Thoughts 233
  Bibliography 235
  Index 239
About the Autho rs
Other Books by Joe Navarro with Marvin Karlins
Credits
Cover
CopyrightAbout the Publisherv CONTENTS

Page 7:
FOREWORD
I See What 
You’re Thinking
Marvin Karlins, Ph.D.
 The man sat stoically at one end of the table, carefully crafting his 
replies to the FBI agent’s inquiries. He wasn’t considered a major suspect in the murder case. His alibi was believable and he sounded 
sincere, but the agent pressed on nevertheless. With the suspect’s consent, he was asked a series of questions about the murder weapon:
“If you had committed this crime, would you have used a gun?”
“If you had committed this crime, would you have used a knife?”“If you had committed this crime, would you have used an ice pick?”“If you had committed this crime, would you have used a hammer?”
One of the weapons, the ice pick, had actually been used in the 
commission of the crime, but that information had been kept from the public. Thus, only the killer would know which object was the real murder weapon. As the FBI agent went down the list of weapons, he 

Page 8:
observed the suspect carefully. When the ice pick was mentioned, the 
man’s eyelids came down hard and stayed down until the next weapon was named. The agent instantly understood the significance of the eyelid behavior he had witnessed, and from that moment forward the “minor” suspect became the primary person of interest in the investiga-tion. He later confessed to the crime.
Chalk one up for Joe Navarro, a remarkable human being who, in 
addition to unmasking the ice-pick killer, is credited with catching scores of criminals, including “master spies,” in a distinguished twenty-five-year career with the FBI. How was he able to do this? If you asked him, he quietly would say, “I owe it to being able to read people.”
Joe, it turns out, has spent his entire professional life studying, refin-
ing, and applying the science of nonverbal communications—facial ex-pressions, gestures, physical movements (kinesics), body distance (proxemics), touching (haptics), posture, even clothing—to decipher what people are thinking, how they intend to act, and whether their pro-nouncements are true or false. This is not good news for criminals, ter-
rorists, and spies, who, under his careful scrutiny, usually give off more than enough nonverbal body signals (“tells”) to make their thoughts and intentions transparent and detectable.
It is, however, very good news for you, the reader, because the very 
same nonverbal knowledge Joe relied on to become a master “Spycatcher,” “human lie detector,” and instructor at the FBI is what he will be sharing with you so you can better understand the feelings, thoughts, and inten-tions of those around you. As a renowned author and educator, Joe will teach you how to observe like an expert, detecting and deciphering the nonverbal behaviors of others so you can interact with them more suc-cessfully. For business or for pleasure, this knowledge will enrich and magnify your life.
Much of what Joe will be sharing with you in this book was not even 
recognized fifteen years ago by the scientific community. It is only through recent advances in brain-scan technology and neural imaging that scientists have been able to establish the validity of the behaviors Joe will be describing. Drawing from the latest discoveries in psychology, FOREWORD vii

Page 9:
neurobiology, medicine, sociology, criminology, communication studies, 
and anthropology—plus his quarter century of experience using nonver-bal behavior in his work as an FBI Special Agent—Joe is uniquely qualified to help you succeed in your understanding of nonverbal com-munications. His expertise is recognized and sought worldwide. Besides being interviewed regularly on programs such as NBC’s  Today Show, 
CNN  Headline News, Fox Cable News,  and ABC’s Good Morning America , 
he continues to conduct seminars on nonverbal communication for the FBI and the CIA, as well as for other members of the intelligence com-munity. He is a consultant to the banking and insurance industries as well as to major law firms in the United States and abroad. Joe also teaches at Saint Leo University and at various medical schools through-out the United States, where his unique insights into nonverbal commu-nication have found a receptive audience among many, including physicians desiring to assess patients with greater speed and accuracy. Joe’s combination of academic skills and occupational credentials—cou-pled with his masterful analysis of nonverbal communications in real-life, high-stakes situations—has placed him apart and in the forefront of nonverbal expertise, as you will discover in this book.
After working with Joe, attending his seminars, and putting his ideas 
to work in my own life, I firmly believe that the material in these pages represents a major advance in our understanding of all things nonverbal. I say this as a trained psychologist who got involved in this writing proj-ect because I was excited by Joe’s pioneering work in harnessing the sci-
entific  knowledge of nonverbal communications to achieve professional 
objectives and personal success.
I was also impressed by his reasoned, careful approach to the topic. 
For example, while observing nonverbals allows us to get an “accurate read” on many kinds of behavior, Joe warns us that using body language to detect deception is a particularly difficult and challenging task. This is a significant insight—rarely recognized by laypeople or by the law en-forcement community—and serves as a critical and poignant reminder to be very careful before you declare a person to be honest or dishonest 
based on his nonverbal behaviors. FOREWORD viii

Page 10:
Unlike many other books on nonverbal behavior, the information 
presented herein is based on scientific facts and field-tested findings rather than on personal opinion and armchair speculations. Further, the text highlights what other published works often ignore: the critical role played by the limbic system  of the human brain in understanding and us-
ing nonverbal cues effectively.
The silent language of the body can be yours to master. Whether you 
are studying nonverbals because you want to get ahead in your job or simply want to get along better with friends and family, this book is de-signed for you. Gaining proficiency will require a careful examination of the chapters that follow, plus a commitment to spend some serious time and energy learning and applying Joe’s teachings in your daily routines.
Reading people successfully—learning, decoding, and utilizing non-
verbal behavior to predict human actions—is a task well worth your at-tention, one that offers ample rewards for the effort expended. So plant your feet firmly on the floor, turn to the next page, and get ready to learn and watch for those all-important nonverbal behaviors that Joe will be teaching you. It won’t be long before you discover, with just a glance, what every body  is saying.FOREWORD ix

Page 11:
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 When I started writing the early drafts of this book, I realized 
that this project had been long in the making. It did not start with my interest in reading about nonverbal behavior, nor in 
pursuing it academically, nor in the FBI. Rather, in a real sense, it started with my family many years earlier.
I learned to read others primarily from the teachings of my parents, 
Albert and Mariana Lopez, and my grandmother, Adelina Paniagua Es-pino. Each in his or her own way taught me something different about the significance and power of nonverbal communications. From my mother, I learned that nonverbals are invaluable in dealing with others. A subtle behavior, she taught me, can avert an awkward situation or can make someone completely comfortable—a skill she has performed effort-lessly all of her life. From my father, I learned the power of expression; 

Page 12:
with one look he can communicate volumes with exquisite clarity. He is a 
man who commands respect, just by being. And from my grandmother, to whom I dedicate this book, I learned that small behaviors have great significance: a smile, a head tilt, a gentle touch at the right time can con-vey so much; it can even heal. These things they taught me every day, and in so doing, prepared me to observe more aptly the world around me. Their teachings as well as those of many others are found in these pages.
While I was at Brigham Young University, J. Wesley Sherwood, 
Richard T ownsend, and Dean Clive Winn II taught me much about police work and observing criminals. Later, in the FBI, people such as Doug Gregory, T om Riley, Julian “Jay” Koerner, Dr. Richard Ault, and David G. Major taught me the subtle nuances of counterintelligence and espionage behavior. T o them I am grateful for sharpening my people-watching skills. Similarly, I have to thank Dr. John Schafer, former FBI agent and fellow member of the bureau’s elite Behavioral Analysis Pro-gram, who encouraged me to write and allowed me to be his coauthor on multiple occasions. Marc Reeser, who was with me in the trenches catch-ing spies for so long, also deserves my recognition. T o my other col-leagues, and there were many in the National Security Division of the FBI, I thank you for all your support.
Over the years, the FBI ensured we were taught by the best, and so at 
the hands of professors Joe Kulis, Paul Ekman, Maureen O’Sullivan, Mark Frank, Bella M. DePaulo, Aldert Vrij, Reid Meloy, and Judy Bur-goon I learned about the research on nonverbal communications directly or through their writings. I developed a friendship with many of these individuals, including David Givens, who heads the Center for Nonver-bal Studies in Spokane, Washington, and whose writings, teachings, and admonitions I have taken to heart. Their research and writings have en-riched my life, and I have included their work in this volume as well as that of other giants such as Desmond Morris, Edward Hall, and Charles Darwin, who started it all with his seminal book The expression of the 
emotions in man and animals .
W h i l e  t h e s e  p e o p l e  p r o v i d e d  t h e  a c a d e m i c  f r a m e w o r k ,  o t h e r s  c o n -
tributed in their own ways to this project, and I must recognize them ACKNOWLEDGMENTS xi

Page 13:
individually. My dear friend Elizabeth Lee Barron, at the University of 
Tampa, is a godsend when it comes to research. I am also indebted to Dr. Phil Quinn at the University of Tampa and to Professor Barry Glover, at Saint Leo University, for their years of friendship and willingness to ac-commodate my busy travel schedule.
This book would not be the same without photographs, and for that 
I am grateful for the work of renowned photographer Mark Wemple. My gratitude also goes out to Ashlee B. Castle, my administrative assis-tant, who, when asked if she was willing to make faces for a book, merely said, “Sure, why not?” You guys are great. I also want to thank Tampa artist David R. Andrade for his illustrations.
Matthew Benjamin, my ever-patient editor at HarperCollins, put this 
project together and deserves my praise for being a gentleman and a con-summate professional. My praise also goes to Executive Editor T oni Sci-arra, who worked so diligently to finalize this project. Matthew and T oni work with a wonderful team of people at HarperCollins, including copy editor Paula Cooper, to whom I owe many thanks. And as before, I want to thank Dr. Marvin Karlins for once again shaping my ideas into this book and for his kind words in the foreword.
My gratitude goes out to my dear friend Dr. Elizabeth A. Murray, a 
true scientist and educator, who took time out from her busy teaching schedule to edit the early drafts of this manuscript and share her volumi-nous knowledge of the human body.
T o my family—all of my family, near and far—I thank you for toler-
ating me and my writing when I should have been relaxing with you. T o Luca, muito obrigado.  T o  m y  d a u g h t e r ,  S t e p h a n i e ,  I  g i v e  th a n k s  e v e r y  
day for your loving soul.
All of these individuals ha v e contributed to this book in some wa y; 
their knowledge and insight, small and large, is shared with you herein. I wrote this book with the sober knowledge that many of you will use this information in your daily lives. T o that end, I have worked assidu-ously to present both the science and the empirical information with diligence and clarity. If there are any errors in this book, they are my re-sponsibility and mine alone. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS x i i

Page 14:
There is an old Latin saying, “Qui docet, discit” (He who teaches, 
learns). In many ways, writing is no different; it is a process of learning and discerning, which at the end of the day has been a pleasure. It is my hope that when you come to the end of this book, you too will have gained a profound knowledge of how we communicate nonverbally—and that your life will be enriched, as mine has been, by knowing what every body  is saying.
Joe Navarro
Tampa, FloridaAugust 2007ACKNOWLEDGMENTS xiii

Page 15:
ONE
Mastering the Secrets of
Nonverbal Communication
Whenever I’m teaching people about “body language,” this 
question is invariably asked. “Joe, what got you interested in s t u d y i n g  n o n v e r b a l  b e h a v i o r  i n  t h e  f i r s t  p l a c e ? ”  I t  w a s n ’ t  
something I had planned to do, nor was it the result of some long-term fascination with the topic. It was much more down-to-earth than that. It was an interest born of necessity, the need to adapt successfully to a totally new way of life. When I was eight years old, I came to America as an exile from Cuba. We left just a few months after the Bay of Pigs invasion, and we honestly thought we would be here only for a short while as refugees.
Unable to speak English at first, I did what thousands of other im-
migrants coming to this country have done. I quickly learned that to fit in with my new classmates at school, I needed to be aware of—and sen-sitive to—the “other” language around me, the language of nonverbal 

Page 16:
2  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
behavior. I found that was a language I could  translate and understand 
immediately. In my young mind, I saw the human body as a kind of billboard that transmitted (advertised) what a person was thinking via gestures, facial expressions, and physical movements that I could read. Over time, obviously, I learned English—and even lost some skill with the Spanish language—but the nonverbals, I never forgot. I discovered at an early age that I could always rely on nonverbal communications.
I  l e a r n e d  t o  u s e  b o d y  l a n gu a g e  t o  d e c i p h e r  w h a t  m y  c l a s s m a t e s  a n d 
teachers were trying to communicate to me and how they felt about me. One of the first things I noticed was that students or teachers who genu-inely liked me would raise (or arch) their eyebrows when they first saw me walk into the room. On the other hand, those individuals who weren’t too friendly toward me would squint their eyes slightly when I appeared—a behavior that once observed is never forgotten. I used this nonverbal infor-mation, as so many other immigrants have, quickly to evaluate and develop friendships, to communicate despite the obvious language barrier, to avoid enemies, and in nurturing healthy relationships. Many years later I would use these same nonverbal eye behaviors to solve crimes as a special agent at the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) (see box 1).
Based on my background, education, and training, I want to teach 
you to see the world as an FBI expert on nonverbal communication views it: as a vivid, dynamic environment where every human interaction resonates with information, and as an opportunity to use the silent lan-guage of the body to enrich your knowledge of what people are think -ing, feeling, and intending to do. Using this knowledge will help you stand out among others. It will also protect you and give you previously hidden insight into human behavior.
WHAT EXACTLY IS NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION?
N o n v e r b a l  c o m m u n i c a t i o n ,  o f t e n  r e f e r r e d  t o  a s  n o n v e r b a l  b e h a v i o r  o r  body language, is a means of transmitting information—just like the spoken word—except it is achieved through facial expressions, gestures, 

Page 17:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION  3
BOX 1:  IN THE BLINK OF AN EYE
“Eye-blocking” is a nonverbal behavior that can occur when we feel 
threatened and/or don’t like what we see. Squinting (as in the case with my classmates, described above) and closing or shielding our eyes are actions that have evolved to protect the brain from “seeing” undesirable images and to communicate our disdain toward others.
As an investigator, I used eye-blocking behaviors to assist in the arson 
investigation of a tragic hotel fire in Puerto Rico that claimed ninety-seven lives. A security guard came under immediate suspicion because the 
blaze broke out in an area where he was assigned. One of the ways we determined he had nothing to do with starting the fire was by asking him some very specific questions as to where he was before the fire, at the time of the fire, and whether or not he set the fire. After each question I observed his face for any telltale signs of eye-block behavior. His eyes blocked only when questioned about where he was when the fire started. Oddly, in contrast, he did not seem troubled by the question, “Did you set the fire?” This told me the real issue was his location at the time of the fire, not his possible involvement in setting the fire. He was questioned further on this topic by the lead investigators and eventually admitted to leaving his post to visit his girlfriend, who also worked at the hotel. Unfor-tunately, while he was gone, the arsonists entered the area he should have been guarding and started the fire.
In this case, the guard’s eye-blocking behavior gave us the insight we 
needed to pursue a line of questioning that eventually broke the case open. In the end, three arsonists responsible for the tragic blaze were ar-rested and convicted of the crime. The security guard, while woefully negligent and burdened with tremendous guilt, was not, however, the culprit.

Page 18:
4  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 2:  ACTIONS SPEAK LOUDER THAN WORDS
A memorable example of how body language can sometimes be more 
truthful than verbal language involved the rape of a young woman on the Parker Indian Reservation in Arizona. A suspect in the case was brought in for questioning. His words sounded convincing and his story was plau-sible. He claimed he hadn’t seen the victim and while out in a field had gone down a row of cotton, turned left, and then walked straight to his house. While my colleagues jotted down notes about what they were hearing, I kept my eyes on the suspect and saw that as he told the story about turning left and going home, his hand gestured to his right , which 
was exactly the direction that led to the rape scene. If I hadn’t been watching him, I wouldn’t have caught the discrepancy between his verbal (“I went left”) and nonverbal (hand gesturing to the right) behavior. But once I saw it I suspected he was lying. I waited a while and then con-fronted him again, and in the end he confessed to the crime.touching (haptics), physical movements (kinesics), posture, body adorn-
ment (clothes, jewelry, hairstyle, tattoos, etc.), and even the tone, timbre, and volume of an individual’s voice (rather than spoken content). Nonverbal behaviors comprise approximately 60 to 65 percent of all interpersonal communication and, during lovemaking, can constitute 100 percent of communication between partners (Burgoon, 1994, 229–285).
Nonverbal communication can also reveal a person’s true thoughts, 
feelings, and intentions. For this reason, nonverbal behaviors are some-times referred to as tells (they tell us about the person’s true state of 
mind). Because people are not always aware they are communicating n o n v e r b a l l y ,  b o d y  l a n g u a g e  i s  o f t e n  m o r e  h o n e s t  t h a n  a n  i n d i v i d u a l ’ s  verbal pronouncements, which are consciously crafted to accomplish the speaker’s objectives (see box 2).

Page 19:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION  5
Whenever your observation of another person’s nonverbal behavior 
helps you understand that person’s feelings, intentions, or actions—or clarifies his or her spoken words—then you have successfully decoded and used this silent medium.
USING NONVERBAL BEHAVIOR TO 
ENHANCE YOUR LIFE
It has been well established by researchers that those who can effec-
tively read and interpret nonverbal communication, and manage how others perceive them, will enjoy greater success in life than individuals who lack this skill (Goleman, 1995, 13–92). It is the goal of this book to teach you how to observe the world around you and to determine the meaning of nonverbals in any setting. This powerful knowledge will enhance your personal interactions and enrich your life, as it has mine.
One of the fascinating things about an appreciation for nonverbal 
behavior is its universal applicability. It works everywhere humans inter-act. Nonverbals are ubiquitous and reliable. Once you know what a spe-cific nonverbal behavior means, you can use that information in any number of different circumstances and in all types of environments. In fact, it is difficult to interact effectively without nonverbals. If you ever wondered why people still fly to meetings in the age of computers, text messages, e-mails, telephones, and video conferencing, it is because of the need to express and observe nonverbal communications in person. Noth-ing beats seeing the nonverbals up close and personal. Why? Because nonverbals are powerful and they have meaning. Whatever you learn from this book, you will be able to apply to any situation, in any setting. Case in point (see box 3 on next page):

Page 20:
6  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 3:  GIVING A DOCTOR THE UPPER HAND
Several months ago I presented a seminar to a group of poker players on 
how to use nonverbal behavior to read their opponents’ hands and win more money at the tables. Because poker is a game that emphasizes bluffing and deception, players have a keen interest in being able to read the tells of their opponents. For them, decoding nonverbal communica-tions is critical to success. While many were grateful for the insights I provided, what startled me was how many seminar participants were able to see the value of understanding and utilizing nonverbal behavior beyond the poker table.
Two weeks after the session ended I received an e-mail from one of 
the participants, a physician from Texas. “What I find most amazing,” he wrote me, “is that what I learned in your seminar has also helped me in my practice. The nonverbals you taught us in order to read poker players have helped me read my patients, too. Now I can sense when they are uncom-fortable, confident, or not being entirely truthful.” The doctor’s note speaks to the universality of nonverbals and their value in all facets of life.
MASTERING NONVERBAL COMMUNICATIONS 
REQUIRES A PARTNERSHIP
I am convinced that any person possessing normal intelligence can learn 
to use nonverbal communication to better themselves. I know this be-cause for the past two decades I have taught thousands of people, just like y ou, ho w to successfully decode non v erbal beha vior and use that infor -mation to enrich their lives, the lives of their loved ones, and to achieve their personal and professional goals. Accomplishing this, however, re-quires that you and I establish a working partnership, each contributing something of significance to our mutual effort.

Page 21:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION  7
Following the Ten Commandments for Observing 
and Decoding Nonverbal Communications Successfully
Reading people successfully—collecting nonverbal intelligence to assess 
their thoughts, feelings, and intentions—is a skill that requires constant practice and proper training. T o help you on the training side, I want to provide you with some important guidelines—or commandments—to maximize your effectiveness in reading nonverbals. As you incorporate these comman dm en ts in to y our e v ery da y lif e an d mak e them part of your routine, they soon will become second nature to you, needing lit-tl e, if an y , co nsci o us th o u g h t. I t ’ s a l ot lik e l ear nin g t o d ri v e. Do y o u remember the first time you gave that a go? If you were like me, you were so concerned with operating the vehicle that it was difficult to track what you were doing inside  the car and concentrate on what was 
happening on the road outside  at the same time. It was only when you 
felt comfortable behind the wheel that you were able to expand your focus to encompass the total driving environment. That’s the way it is with nonverbal behavior. Once you master the mechanics of using non-verbal communication effectively, it will become automatic and you can focus your full attention on decoding the world around you.
Commandment 1: Be a competent observer of your environment.  
This is the most basic requirement for anyone wishing to decode and use nonverbal communications.
Imagine the foolishness of trying to listen to someone with plugs in 
our ears. We couldn’t hear the message and whatever was said would be lost on us. Thus, most intent listeners don’t go around wearing ear-plugs! Yet, when it comes to seeing the silent language of nonverbal behavior, many viewers might as well be wearing blindfolds, as oblivi-ous as they are to the body signals around them. Consider this. Just as careful listening  is critical to understanding our verbal pronounce-
ments, so careful observation  is vital to comprehending our body lan-
g u a g e .  W h o a !  D o n ’ t  j u s t  b r e e z e  p a s t  t h a t  s e n t e n c e  a n d  c o n t i n u e  

Page 22:
8  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
reading. What it states is critical. Concerted  (effortful) observation —is 
absolutely essential to reading people and detecting their nonverbal tells successfully.
The problem is that most people spend their lives looking but not 
truly seeing, or, as Sherlock Holmes, the meticulous English detective, declared to his partner, Dr. Watson, “You see, but you do not observe.” Sadly, the majority of individuals view their surroundings with a mini-mal amount of observational effort. Such people are oblivious to subtle changes in their world. They are unaware of the rich tapestry of details that surrounds them, such as the subtle movement of a person’s hand or foot that might betray his thoughts or intentions.
In fact, various scientific studies have demonstrated people to be 
poor observers of their world. For example, when a man dressed in a gorilla suit walked in front of a group of students while other activities w e r e  t a k i n g  p l a c e ,  h a l f  t h e  s t u d e n t s  d i d n ’ t  e v e n  n o t i c e  t h e  g o r i l l a  i n  their midst (Simons & Chabris, 1999, 1059–1074)!
Observation-impoverished individuals lack what airline pilots refer 
to as “situational awareness,” which is a sense of where one is at all times; they don’t have a solid mental picture of exactly what is going on around them or ev en in front of them. Ask them to go into a strange room filled with people, give them a chance to look around, and then tell them to close their eyes and report what they saw. You would be astounded by their inability to recall even the most obvious features in the room.
I find it disheartening how often we run into somebody or read about 
someone who always seems to be blindsided by life’s events. The com-plaints of these individuals are nearly always the same:
“My wife just filed for divorce. I never had a clue she was unhappy 
with our marriage.”
“The guidance counselor tells me my son has been using cocaine 
for three years. I had no idea he had a drug problem.”

Page 23:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION  9
“I was arguing with this guy and out of nowhere he sucker punched 
me. I never saw it coming.”
“I thought the boss was pretty happy with my job performance. I 
had no idea I was going to be fired.”
These are the kinds of statements made by men and women who have 
never learned how to observe the world around them effectively. Such in-adequacies are not surprising, really. After all, as we grow from children to adults, we’re never instructed on how to observe the nonverbal clues of others. There are no classes in elementary school, high school, or college that teach people situational awareness. If you’re lucky, you teach yourself to be more observant. If you don’t, you miss out on an incredible amount of useful information that could help you avoid problems and make your life more fulfilling, be it when dating, at work, or with family.
Fortunately, observation is a skill that can be learned. We don’t have to 
go through life being blindsided. Furthermore, because it is a skill, we can get better at it with the right kind of training and practice. If you are ob-servationally “challenged,” do not despair. You can overcome your weak-ness in this area if you are willing to devote time and effort to observing your world more conscientiously.
What you need to do is make observation—concerted observation—a 
way of life. Becoming aware of the world around you is not a passive act. It is a conscious, deliberate behavior—something that takes effort, en-ergy, and concentration to achieve, and constant practice  to maintain. 
Observation is like a muscle. It grows stronger with use and atrophies without use. Exercise your observation muscle and you will become a more powerful decoder of the world around you.
By the way, when I speak of concerted observation, I am asking you to 
utilize all your senses, not just your sense of sight. Whenever I walk into my apartment, I take a deep breath. If things don’t smell “normal” I be-come concerned. One time I detected the slight odor of lingering ciga-rette smoke when I returned home from a trip. My nose alerted me to possible danger well before my eyes could scan my apartment. It turned 

Page 24:
1 0  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
out that the apartment maintenance man had been by to fix a leaky pipe, 
and the smoke on his clothes and skin were still lingering in the air sev-eral hours later. Fortunately, he was a welcome intruder, but there could just as easily have been a burglar lurking in the next room. The point is, by using all my senses, I was better able to assess my environment and contribute to my own safety and well-being.
Commandment 2: Observing in context is key to understanding nonverbal behavior.
 When trying to understand nonverbal behavior in 
real-life situations, the more you understand the context  in which it takes 
place, the better you will be at understanding what it means. For exam-ple, after a traffic accident, I expect people to be in shock and to walk around looking dazed. I expect their hands to shake and even for them to make poor decisions like walking into oncoming traffic. (This is why officers ask you to stay in your car.) Why? After an accident, people are suffering the effects of a complete hijacking of the “thinking” brain by a region of the brain known as the limbic system . The result of this hijack-
ing includes behaviors such as trembling, disorientation, nervousness, and discomfort. In context, these actions are to be expected and confirm the stress from the accident. During a job interview, I expect applicants to be nervous initially and for that nervousness to dissipate. If it shows up again when I ask specific questions, then I have to wonder why these nervous behaviors have suddenly presented again.
Commandment 3: Learn to recognize and decode nonverbal be-haviors that are universal.
 Some body behaviors are considered uni-
versal because they are exhibited similarly by most people. For instance, w h e n peo p l e p r e s s th e i r l i p s t o g e th e r in a m ann e r th a t s e e m s t o m ak e them disappear, it is a clear and common sign that they are troubled and something is wrong. This nonverbal behavior, known as lip compression,  
is one of the universal tells  that I will be describing in the chapters to fol-
low (see box 4). The more of these universal nonverbals you can recognize 
and accurately interpret, the more effective you will be in assessing the thoughts, feelings, and intentions of those around you.

Page 25:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION  11
BOX 4:  A PURSING OF LIPS LEADS TO 
SAVINGS ON SHIPS
Universal tells of the lips were very helpful to me during a consulting as-
signment with a British shipping company. My British client had asked me to sit through their contract negotiations with a huge multinational corporation that would be outfitting their vessels. I agreed and suggested that the proposed contract be presented point by point, with agreement being reached on each item before moving forward. That way I could more closely watch the corporate negotiator for any nonverbals that might reveal information helpful to my client.
“I’ll pass you a note if I spot something that needs your attention,” I 
told my client and then settled back to watch the parties review the con-tract clause by clause. I didn’t have long to wait before I saw an important tell. When a clause detailing the outfitting of a specific part of the vessel was read—a construction phase involving millions of dollars—the chief negotiator from the multinational corporation pursed his lips, a clear indi-cation that something in this part of the contract was not to his liking.
I passed a note to my client, warning him that this particular clause in 
the contract was contentious or problematic and should be revisited and discussed thoroughly while we were all still together.
By confronting the issue then and there—and focusing on the details 
of the clause in question—the two negotiators were able to hammer out an agreement face-to-face, which ended up saving my client 13.5 million dollars. The negotiator’s nonverbal signal of displeasure was the key evi-dence needed to spot a specific problem and deal with it immediately and effectively.

Page 26:
1 2  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
Commandment 4: Learn to recognize and decode idiosyncratic 
nonverbal behaviors.  Universal nonverbal behaviors constitute one 
group of body cues: those that are relatively the same for everyone. There i s a s e c o n d ty pe o f bod y c u e cal l e d an idiosyncratic nonverbal behavior,  
which is a signal that is relatively unique to a particular individual.
I n a tt e m p tin g t o i d e n tify i d i o s y n c r a ti c s i gn al s, y o u ’ll w an t t o be o n 
the lookout for behavioral patterns  in people you interact with on a regu-
lar basis (friends, family, coworkers, persons who provide goods or ser-vices to you on a consistent basis). The better you know an individual, or the longer you interact with him or her , the easier it will be to discover this information because you will have a larger database upon which to make your judgments. For example, if you note your teenager scratches his head and bites his lip when he is about to take a test, this may be a reliable idiosyncratic tell that speaks of his nervousness or lack of prepa-ration. No doubt this has become part of his repertoire for dealing with stress, and you will see it again and again because “the best predictor of future behavior is past behavior.”
Commandment 5: When you interact with others, try to establish their baseline behaviors.
 In order to get a handle on the baseline behav-
iors of the people with whom you regularly interact, you need to note how 
they look normally, how they typically sit, where they place their hands, the usual position of their feet, their posture and common facial expres-sions, the tilt of their heads, and even where they generally place or hold their possessions, such as a purse (see figures 1 and 2). You need to be able to differentiate between their “normal” face and their “stressed” face.
Not getting a baseline puts you in the same position as parents who 
never look down their child’s throat until the youngster gets sick. They call the doctor and try to describe what they see inside, but they have no means of making a comparison because they never looked at the child’s throat when he or she was healthy. By examining what’s normal, we be-gin to recognize and identify what’s abnormal.
Even in a single encounter with someone, you should attempt to note 

Page 27:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION  13
his or her “starting position” at the beginning of your interaction. Estab-
lishing a person’s baseline behavior is critical because it allows you to de-termine when he or she deviates from it, which can be very important and informative (see box 5).
Commandment 6: Always try to watch people for multiple tells—behaviors that occur in clusters or in succession.
 Your ac-
curacy in reading people will be enhanced when you observe multiple 
tells, or clusters of behavior body signals on which to rely. These signals 
work together like the parts of a jigsaw puzzle. The more pieces of the puzzle you possess, the better your chances of putting them all together and seeing the picture they portray. T o illustrate, if I see a business com-petitor display a pattern of stress behaviors, followed closely by pacifying behaviors, I can be more confident that she is bargaining from a position of weakness.
Commandment 7: It’s important to look for changes in a person’s behavior that can signal changes in thoughts, emotions, interest, or intent.
 Sudden changes  in behavior can help reveal how a person is Note features of face when not stressed. 
Eyes are relaxed and the lips should be full.A stressed face is tense and slightly 
contorted, eyebrows are knitted, and the forehead is furrowed.
Fig. 2 Fig. 1

Page 28:
1 4  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 5:  IT’S A RELATIVE MATTER
Imagine for a moment that you’re the parent of an eight-year-old boy who 
is waiting in line to greet relatives at a large family reunion. As this is a yearly ritual, you have stood with your son on numerous occasions while he waited his turn to say hello to everyone. He has never hesitated to run up and give family members a big hug. However, on this occasion, when it comes time to embrace his Uncle Harry, he stands stiff and frozen in 
place.
“What’s the matter?” you whisper to him, pushing him toward his 
waiting uncle.
Your son doesn’t say anything, but he is very reluctant to respond to 
your physical signal.
What should you do? The important thing to note here is that your 
son’s behavior is a deviation from his baseline behavior. In the past, he has never hesitated to greet his uncle with a hug. Why the change in be-havior? His “freeze” response suggests he feels threatened or something negative. Perhaps there is no justified reason for his fear, but to the obser-vant and sensibly cautious parent, a warning signal should go off. Your son’s deviation from his previous behavior suggests that something nega-tive might have occurred between him and his uncle since their last meeting. Perhaps it was a simple disagreement, the awkwardness of youth, or a reaction to the uncle’s preferential treatment of others. Then again, this behavior might indicate something much more sinister. The point is that a change in a person’s baseline behavior suggests that some-thing might be amiss and, in this particular case, probably warrants fur-ther attention.

Page 29:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION  15
processing information or adapting to emotional events. A child who is 
exhibiting giddiness and delight at the prospect of entering a theme par k will c han g e his be ha v i o r imm edia t e l y u po n l ear nin g th e par k is closed. Adults are no different. When we get bad news over the phone or see something that can hurt us, our bodies reflect that change imme-diately.
Changes in a person’s behavior can also reveal his or her interest or 
intentions in certain circumstances. Careful observation of such changes can allow you to predict things before they happen, clearly giving you an advantage—particularly if the impending action could cause harm to you or others (see box 6).
Commandment 8: Learning to detect false or misleading nonver-bal signals is also critical.
 The ability to differentiate between authen-
tic and misleading cues  takes practice and experience. It requires not only 
concerted observation, but also some careful judgment. In the chapters to come, I will teach you the subtle differences in a person’s actions that reveal whether a behavior is honest or dishonest, increasing your chances of getting an accurate read on the person with whom you are dealing.
Commandment 9: Knowing how to distinguish between comfort and discomfort will help you to focus on the most important be-haviors for decoding nonverbal communications.
 Having studied 
nonverbal behavior most of my adult life, I have come to realize that there are two principal things we should look for and focus on: comfort  and 
discomfort . This is fundamental to how I teach nonverbal communica-
tions. Learning to read comfort and discomfort cues (behaviors) in others accurately will help you to decipher what their bodies and minds are truly saying. If in doubt as to what a behavior means, ask yourself if this looks lik e a comf ort beha vior ( e.g ., con ten tmen t, ha ppiness, r elaxa tion ) or if i t l o o k s  l i k e  a  d i s c o m f o r t  b e h a v i o r  ( e . g . ,  d i s p l e a s u r e ,  u n h a p p i n e s s ,  s t r e s s ,  anxiety , tension). Most of the time you will be able to place observed be-haviors in one of these two domains (comfort vs. discomfort).

Page 30:
1 6  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 6:  A NOSE FOR TROUBLE
Among the most important nonverbal clues to a person’s thoughts are 
changes in body language that constitute intention cues.  These are be-
haviors that reveal what a person is about to do and provide the compe-tent observer with extra time to prepare for the anticipated action before it takes place.
One personal example of how critical it is to watch for changes in 
people’s behavior—particularly when the changes involve intention cues—involves an attempted robbery of a store where I worked. In this particular situation, I noticed a man standing near the cash register at the checkout counter, a behavior that caught my attention because he seemed to have 
no reason to be there; he wasn’t waiting in line and he hadn’t purchased any items. Moreover, the entire time he stood there, his eyes were fixed on the cash register.
If he had just remained quietly where he was, I eventually would have 
lost interest in him and focused my attention elsewhere. However, while I was still observing him, his behavior changed. Specifically, his nostrils start-ing flaring (nasal wing dilation), which was a giveaway that he was oxygenat-ing in advance of taking some action. I guessed what that action was going to be about a second before it occurred. And a second was all I had to sound a warning. I yelled to the cashier, “Watch out!” as three things hap-pened at once: (a) the clerk finished ringing up a sale, causing the cash drawer to open; (b) the man near the register lunged forward, plunging his hand into the drawer to grab some cash; and (c) alerted by my shouted warning, the cashier grabbed the man’s hand and twisted it, causing the would-be robber to drop the money and run out of the store. Had I not spot-ted his intention cue, I am sure the thief would have succeeded in his ef-forts. Incidentally, the cashier was my father, who was running a small hardware store in Miami back in 1974. I was his summer hire.

Page 31:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION  17
Commandment 10: When observing others, be subtle about it.  
Using nonverbal behavior requires you to observe people carefully and decode their nonverbal behaviors accurately. However, one thing you don’t  want to do when observing others is to make your intentions obvi-
ous. Many individuals tend to stare at people when they first try to spot nonverbal cues. Such intrusive observation is not advisable. Your ideal goal is to observe others without their knowing it, in other words, unob-trusively.
Work at perfecting your observational skills, and you will reach a 
point where your efforts will be both successful and subtle. It’s all a mat-
ter of practice and persistence.
You have now been introduced to your part of our partnership, the 
ten commandments you need to follow to decode nonverbal communica-tion successfully. The question now becomes “What nonverbal behaviors should I be looking for, and what important information do they re-veal?” This is where I come in.
Identifying Important Nonverbal Behaviors 
and Their Meanings
Consider this. The human body is capable of giving off literally thou-
sands of nonverbal “signals” or messages. Which ones are most impor-tant and how do you decode them? The problem is that it could take a lifetime of painstaking observation, evaluation, and validation to identify and interpret important nonverbal communications accurately. Fortu-nately, with the help of some very gifted researchers and my practical experience as an FBI expert on nonverbal behavior, we can take a more direct approach to get you on your way. I have already identified those nonverbal behaviors that are most important, so you can put this unique k n o w l e d g e  t o  i m m e d i a t e  u s e .  W e  h a v e  a l s o  d e v e l o p e d  a  p a r a d i g m  o r  model that makes reading nonverbals easier. Even if you forget exactly what a specific body signal means, you will still be able to decipher it.
As you read through these pages, you will learn certain information 
about nonverbal behavior that has never been revealed in any other text 

Page 32:
1 8  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
o n  b o d y  l a n g u a g e  ( i n c l u d i n g  e x a m p l e s  o f  n o n v e r b a l  b e h a v i o r a l  c l u e s  
used to solv e actual FBI cases ). Some of the material will surprise you. For example, if you had to choose the most “honest” part of a person’s body—the part that would most likely reveal an individual’s true feeling 
or intentions—which part would you select? Take a guess. Once I reveal the answer, you’ll know a prime place to look when attempting to decide what a business associate, family member, date, or total stranger is think-ing, feeling, or intending. I will also explain the physiological basis for nonverbal behavior, the role the brain plays in nonverbal behavior. I will also reveal the truth about detecting deception as no counterintelligence agent has done before.
I firmly believe that understanding the biological basis for body lan-
guage will help you appreciate how nonverbal behavior works and why it is such a potent predictor of human thoughts, feelings, and intentions. Therefore, I start the next chapter with a look at that magnificent organ, the human brain, and show how it governs every facet of our body lan-guage. Before I do so, however, I will share an observation concerning the validity of using body language to understand and assess human be-havior.
FOR WHOM THE TELLS TOLL
On a fateful date in 1963, in Cleveland, Ohio, thirty-nine-year veteran Detective Martin McFadden watched two men walk back and forth in front of a store window. They took turns peeking into the shop and then walking away. After multiple passes, the two men huddled at the end of the street looking over their shoulders as they spoke to a third person. Concerned that the men were “casing” the business and intending to rob the store, the detective moved in, patted down one of the men, and found a concealed handgun. Detective McFadden arrested the three men, thus thwarting a robbery and averting potential loss of life.
Officer McFadden’s detailed observations became the basis for a land-
mark U.S. Supreme Court decision ( Terry v. Ohio,  1968, 392 U.S. 1) 

Page 33:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION  19
known to every police officer in the United States. Since 1968, this ruling 
has allowed police officers to stop and frisk individuals without a war-rant when their behaviors telegraph their intention to commit a crime. With this decision, the Supreme Court acknowledged that nonverbal behaviors presage criminality if those behaviors are observed and de-coded properly. Terry v. Ohio  provided a clear demonstration of the rela-
tionship between our thoughts, intentions, and nonverbal behaviors. Most important, this decision provided legal recognition  that such a rela-
tionship exists and is valid (Navarro & Schafer, 2003, 22–24).
So the next time someone says to you that nonverbal behavior does 
not have meaning or is not reliable, remember this case, as it says other-wise and has stood the test of time.

Page 34:


Page 35:
TWO
Living Our Limbic Legacy
Take a moment and bite your lip. Really, take a second and actually 
do it. Now, rub your forehead. Finally, stroke the back of your neck. These are things we do all the time. Spend some time 
around other people and y ou ’ll see them engaging in these beha viors on a regular basis.
Do you ever wonder why they do it? Do you ever wonder why you do 
it? The answer can be found hidden away in a vault—the cranial vault —
where the human brain resides. Once we learn why and how our brain recruits our body to express its emotions nonverbally, we’ll also discover how to interpret these behaviors. So, let’s take a closer look inside that vault and examine the most amazing three pounds of matter found in the human body.
Most people think of themselves as having one brain and recognize 
that brain as the seat of their cognitive abilities. In reality, there are three 

Page 36:
2 2  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
“brains” inside the human skull, each performing specialized functions 
that work together as the “command-and-control center” that regulates everything our body does. Back in 1952, a pioneering scientist named Paul MacLean began to speak of the human brain as a triune brain  con-
sisting of a “reptilian (stem) brain,” “mammalian (limbic) brain,” and “hu-man (neocortex) brain” (see diagram of the limbic brain). In this book, we will be concentrating on the limbic system of the brain (the part MacLean called the mammalian brain), because it plays the largest role in the ex-pression of our nonverbal behavior. However, we will use our neocortex (our human brain or thinking brain) to analyze critically the limbic reac-tions of those around us in order to decode what other people are think-ing, feeling, or intending (LeDoux, 1996, 184–189; Goleman, 1995, 10–21).
It is critical to understand that the brain controls all behaviors, whether 
conscious or subconscious. This premise is the cornerstone of understand-ing all nonverbal communications. From simply scratching your head to composing a symphony, there is nothing you do (except for some involun-tary muscle reflexes) that is not governed or directed by the brain. By this 
Diagram of the limbic brain with major features such as the amygdala and the 
hippocampus.
NeocortexNeocortex
HypothalamusHypothalamus
AmygdalaAmygdala
Reptilian BrainReptilian BrainCerebellumCerebellumHippocampusHippocampusThalamusThalamusCorpus CallosumCorpus CallosumFig. 3

Page 37:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  23
logic, we can use these behaviors to interpret what the brain is choosing to 
communicate externally.
THE VERY ELEGANT LIMBIC BRAIN
In our study of nonverbal communications, the limbic brain is where the action is. Why? Because it is the part of the brain that reacts to the world around us reflexively and instantaneously, in real time, and without thought. For that reason, it gives off a true response to information com-
ing in from the environment (Myers, 1993, 35–39). Because it is uniquely responsible for our survival, the limbic brain does not take breaks. It is always “on.” The limbic brain is also our emotional center. It is from there that signals go out to various other parts of the brain, which in turn orchestrate our behaviors as they relate to emotions or our survival (LeDoux, 1996, 104–137). These behaviors can be observed and decoded as they manifest physically in our feet, torso, arms, hands, and faces. Since these reactions occur without thought, unlike words, they are gen-uine. Thus, the limbic brain is considered the “honest brain” when we think of nonverbals (Goleman, 1995, 13–29).
These limbic survival responses go back not only to our own infancy, 
but also to our ancestry as a human species. They are hardwired into our nervous system, making them difficult to disguise or eliminate—like trying to suppress a startle response even when we anticipate a loud noise. Therefore, it is axiomatic that limbic behaviors are honest and reli-able behaviors; they are true manifestations of our thoughts, feelings, and intentions (see box 7).
The third part of our brain is a relatively recent addition to the cra-
nial vault. Thus it is called the neocortex,  meaning new brain. This part 
of our brain is also known as the “human,” “thinking,” or “intellectual” brain, because it is responsible for higher-order cognition and memory. This is the part of the brain that distinguishes us from other mammals due to the large amount of its mass (cortex) used for thinking. This is the brain that got us to the moon. With its ability to compute, analyze, 

Page 38:
2 4  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 7:  HEAD-ING OFF A BOMBER
Since the limbic part of our brain cannot be cognitively regulated, the 
behaviors it generates should be given greater importance when inter-preting nonverbal communications. You can use your thoughts to try to disguise your true emotions all you want, but the limbic system will self-regulate and give off clues. Observing these alarm reactions and knowing that they are honest and significant is extremely important; it can even 
save lives.
An example of this occurred in December of 1999, when an alert 
U.S. customs officer thwarted a terrorist who came to be known as the “millennial bomber.” Noting the nervousness and excessive sweating of Ahmed Reesam as he entered the United States from Canada, Officer Diana Dean asked him to step out of his car for further questioning. At that point Reesam attempted to flee but was soon captured. In his car, officers found explosives and timing devices. Reesam was eventually convicted of plotting to bomb the Los Angeles Airport.
The nervousness and sweating that Officer Dean observed were reg-
ulated in the brain as a response to immense stress. Because these lim-bic behaviors are genuine, Officer Dean could be confident in pursuing Reesam, with the knowledge that her observations had detected body language that justified further investigation. The Reesam affair illustrates how one’s psychological state manifests nonverbally in the body. In this case, the limbic system of a would-be bomber—who was obviously ex-tremely frightened by the possibility of being detected—gave away his 
nervousness, despite all conscious attempts he made to hide his underly-
ing emotions. We owe Officer Dean our gratitude for being an astute ob-server of nonverbal behavior and foiling a terrorist act.

Page 39:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  25
interpret, and intuit at a level unique to the human species, it is our 
critical and creative brain. It is also, however, the part of the brain that is least honest; therefore, it is our “lying brain.” Because it is capable of complex thought, this brain—unlike its limbic counterpart—is the least 
reliable of the three major brain components. This is the brain that can deceive , and it deceives often (Vrij, 2003, 1–17).
Returning to our earlier example, while the limbic system may compel 
the millennial bomber to sweat profusely while being questioned by the customs officer, the neocortex is quite capable of allowing him to lie about his true sentiments. The thinking part of the brain, which is the part that governs our speech (specifically, Broca’s area), could cause the bomber to say, “I have no explosives in the car,” should the officer inquire as to what is in his automobile, even if that claim is an utter falsehood. The neocor-tex can easily permit us to tell a friend that we like her new haircut when we, in fact, do not, or it can facilitate the very convincing statement, “I did not have sexual relations with that woman, Ms. Lewinsky.”
Because the neocortex (the thinking brain) is capable of dishonesty, it 
is not a good source of reliable or accurate information (Ost, 2006, 259–291). In summary, when it comes to revealing honest nonverbal behaviors that help us read people, the limbic system is the holy grail of body lan-guage. Thus, this is the area of the brain where we want to focus our at-tention.
OUR LIMBIC RESPONSES—THE THREE F’S 
OF NONVERBALS
One of the classic ways the limbic brain has assured our survival as 
a species—and produced a reliable number of nonverbal tells in the pro-cess—is by regulating our behavior when confronting danger, whether it be a prehistoric man facing a Stone Age beast or a modern-day employee facing a stone-hearted boss. Over the millennia, we have retained the competent, life-saving visceral reactions of our animal heritage. In order to ensure our survival, the brain’s very elegant response to distress or 

Page 40:
2 6  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
threats, has taken three forms: freeze, flight,  and fight.  Like other animal 
species whose limbic brains protected them in this manner, humans pos-sessing these limbic reactions survived to propagate because these behav-iors were already hardwired into our nervous system.
I am sure that many of you are familiar with the phrase “fight-or-flight 
response,” which is common terminology used to describe the way in which we respond to threatening or dangerous situations. Unfortunately, this phrase is only two-thirds accurate and half-assed backward! In reality, the way animals, including humans, react to danger occurs in the follow-ing order: freeze, flight, fight. If the reaction really were fight or flight, most of us would be bruised, battered, and exhausted much of the time.
Because we have retained and honed this exquisitely successful pro-
cess for dealing with stress and danger—and because the resulting reac-tions generate nonverbal behaviors that help us understand a person’s thoughts, feelings, and intentions—it is well worth our time to examine each response in greater detail.
The Freeze Response
A million years ago, as early hominids traversed the African savanna, 
they were faced with many predators that could outrun and overpower them. For early man to succeed, the limbic brain, which had evolved from our animal forebearers, developed strategies to compensate for the power advantage our predators had over us. That strategy, or first de-fense of the limbic system, was to use the freeze response  in the presence 
of a predator or other danger. Movement attracts attention; by immedi-ately holding still upon sensing a threat, the limbic brain caused us to react in the most effective manner possible to ensure our survival. Most animals, certainly most predators, react to—and are attracted by—m o v e m e n t .  T h i s  a b i l i t y  t o  f r e e z e  i n  t h e  f a c e  o f  d a n g e r  m a k e s  s e n s e .  Many carnivores go after moving targets and exercise the “chase, trip, and bite” mechanism exhibited by large felines, the primary predators of our ancestors.
Many animals not only freeze their motion when confronted by preda-

Page 41:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  27
tors, but some even play dead, which is the ultimate freeze reaction. This 
is a strategy that opossums use, but they are not the only animals to do so. In fact, accounts of the school shootings at Columbine and Virginia T ech d e m o ns tr a t e tha t s tu d e n ts used th e f r eeze r es po nse t o d eal wi th d ea dl y predators. By holding still and playing dead, many students survived even though they were only a few feet away from the killer. Instinctively, the students adopted ancient behaviors that work very effectively. Freezing your movement can often make you nearly invisible to others, a phenom-enon every soldier and SW AT team operator learns.
Thus, the freeze response has been passed from primitive man to 
modern man and remains with us today as our first line of defense against a perceived threat or danger. In fact, you can still see this ancient limbic reaction to large felines in the theaters of Las Vegas where big cats are part of the show. As the tiger or lion walks onto the stage, you can be sure that the people in the first row will not be making any unnecessary arm or hand gestures. They will be frozen in their seats. These people were not issued memos to remain still; they did so because the limbic brain has prepared the human species to behave that way in the face of danger for over five million years.
In our modern society, the freeze response is employed more subtly in 
everyday life. You can observe it when people are caught bluffing or stealing, or sometimes when they are lying. When people feel threatened or exposed, they react just like our ancestors did a million years earlier; they freeze. Not only have we, as humans, learned to freeze in the face of observed or perceived danger, but others around us have learned to copy our behavior and freeze their behavior also, even without seeing the threat. This mimicry or isopraxism  (same movement) evolved because it 
was critical to communal survival, as well as social harmony, within the human species (see box 8 on next page).
This freezing action is sometimes termed the “deer-in-the-headlights” 
effect. When suddenly caught in a potentially dangerous circumstance, we immediately freeze before taking action. In our day-to-day life, this freeze response manifests innocently, such as when a person walking down the street stops suddenly, perhaps hitting himself on the forehead 

Page 42:
2 8  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 8:  THE NIGHT THE HANDS STOPPED MOVING
I was at my mother’s house a few weeks ago watching television and eat-
ing ice cream with members of the family. It was late at night and some-one rang the doorbell (something that is very unusual in her neighborhood). 
Suddenly, in the midst of eating, everyone’s hands froze—adults and children alike—as if choreographed. It was amazing to see how we all reacted with “hands flash frozen” at precisely the same moment. It turned out that the visitor was my sister who had forgotten her keys. But of course we didn’t know it was her ringing the bell. It was a beautiful ex-
ample of the hardwired communal response to perceived danger, and of 
the first limbic reaction, which is to freeze.
Soldiers in combat react the same way. When the “point man” freezes, 
everyone freezes; nothing needs to be said.
with the palm of his hand, before turning around and heading back to 
his apartment to turn off the stove. That momentary stop is enough for the brain to do some quick assessing, whether the threat comes in the form of a predator or of a thought remembered. Either way, the psyche must deal with a potentially dangerous situation (Navarro, 2007, 141–163).
W e n o t o nl y f r ee ze w h e n c o nf r o n t e d b y p h y s i cal an d v i s ual thr ea ts, 
but as in the example of the late-night doorbell, threats from things we hear (aural threats) can also alert the limbic system. For instance, when b e i n g  c h a s t i s e d ,  m o s t  p e o p l e  h o l d  v e r y  s t i l l .  T h e  s a m e  b e h a v i o r  i s  o b -served when an individual is being questioned about matters that he or she perceives could get them into trouble. The person will freeze in his chair as if in an “ejector seat” (Gregory, 1999).
A similar manifestation of the limbic freeze occurs during interviews 
when people hold their breath or their breathing becomes very shallow. Again, this is a very ancient response to a threat. It is not noticed by the interviewee and yet it is quite observable to anyone watching for it. I have 

Page 43:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  29
often had to tell an interviewee to relax and take a deep breath during 
the middle of an interview or deposition, as he was unaware of just how shallow his breathing had become.
Consistent with the need to freeze when confronted by a threat, peo-
ple being questioned about a crime will often fix their feet in a position of security (interlocked behind the chair legs) and hold that position for an inordinate period of time. When I see this type of behavior, it tells me something is wrong; this is a limbic response that needs to be further explored. The person may or may not be lying, since deceit cannot be directly discerned. But I can be assured from their nonverbal behavior that something is stressing them; therefore I will pursue the source of their discomfort through my questioning or interaction.
Another way the limbic brain uses a modification of the freeze re-
sponse is to attempt to protect us by diminishing our exposure. During surveillance of shoplifters, one of the things that stands out is how often thieves will try to hide their physical presence by restricting their mo-tions or hunching over as if trying to be invisible. Ironically, this makes them stand out even further, since it is such a deviation from normal shopping behavior. Most people walk around a store with their arms quite active and their posture upright rather than stooped. Psychologi-cally, the shoplifters—or, your son and daughter as they try to surrep-titiously swipe a cookie from the pantry—are trying to master their environment by attempting to “hide” in the open. Another way people try to hide in the open is by limiting their head exposure. This is done by raising the shoulders and lowering the head—the “turtle effect.” Picture a losing football team walking off the field after the game and you get the idea (see figure 4).
Interestingly and sadly, abused children often manifest these freezing 
l i m b i c  b e h a v i o r s .  I n  t h e  p r e s e n c e  o f  a n  a b u s i v e  p a r e n t  o r  a d u l t ,  t h e i r  arms will go dormant at their sides and they avoid eye contact as though that helps them not to be seen. In a way, they are hiding in the open, which is a tool of survival for these helpless kids.

Page 44:
3 0  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
The Flight Response
One purpose of the freeze response is to avoid detection by dangerous 
predators or in dangerous situations. A second purpose is to give the threatened individual the opportunity to assess the situation and deter-mine the best course of action to take. When the freeze response is not adequate to eliminate the danger or is not the best course of action (e.g., the threat is too close), the second limbic response is to get away by use of the flight response . Obviously, the goal of this choice is to escape the threat 
or, at a minimum, to distance oneself from danger. Running, of course, is useful when it is practical, and as a survival mechanism our brain di-
The “turtle effect” (shoulders rise toward the 
ears) is often seen when people are humbled or suddenly lose confidence.Fig. 4

Page 45:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  31
rected our body to adopt this tactic judiciously over millennia in order to 
escape from danger.
In our modern world, however, where we live in cities and not in the 
wild, it is difficult to run from threats; therefore we have adapted the flight response to meet our modern needs. The behaviors are not as obvi-ous, but they serve the same purpose—to either block or distance our-selves from the physical presence of undesirable individuals or things.
If you think back on the social interactions you’ve had in your life, 
you’ll probably be able to recall some of the “evasive” actions you took to distance yourself from the unwanted attention of others. Just as a child turns away from undesirable food at the dinner table and shifts her feet toward the exit, an individual may turn away from someone she doesn’t like, or to avoid conversations that threaten her. Blocking behaviors may manifest in the form of closing the eyes, rubbing the eyes, or placing the hands in front of the face.
The person may also distance herself from someone by leaning away, 
placing objects (a purse) on her lap, or turning her feet toward the near-est exit. All of these behaviors are controlled by the limbic brain and indicate that someone wants distance from one or more undesirable persons or any perceived threat in the environment. Again, we under-take these behaviors because, for millions of years, humans have with-drawn from things we didn’t like or that could harm us. Therefore, to this day, we expedite our exit from a deplorable party, distance ourselves from a bad relationship, or lean away from those who are deemed unde-sirable or even with whom we strongly disagree (see figure 5).
Just as a man may turn away from his date, an individual in negotia-
tions may shift away from his counterpart if he hears an unattractive o f f e r  o r  f e e l s  t h r e a t e n e d  a s  b a r g a i n i n g  c o n t i n u e s .  B l o c k i n g  b e h a v i o r s  may also be manifested; the businessperson may close or rub his eyes, or place his hands in front of his face (see figure 6). He may lean away from the table or the other person and turn his feet away as well, some-times in the direction of the nearest exit. These are not behaviors of de-ception, but rather actions that signal that a person feels uncomfortable. These forms of the age-old flight response are distancing  nonverbal be-

Page 46:
3 2  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
haviors that tell you the businessperson is unhappy with what is occur-
ring at the table.
The Fight Response
The fight response  is the limbic brain’s final tactic for survival through 
aggression. When a person confronting danger cannot avoid detection by freezing and cannot save himself by distancing or escaping (flight), the only alternative left is to fight. In our evolution as a species, we—along with other mammals—developed the strategy of turning fear into rage in order to fight off attackers (Panksepp, 1998, 208). In the modern 
People lean away from each other subconsciously when 
they disagree or feel uncomfortable around each other.Fig. 5

Page 47:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  33
world, however, acting on our rage may not be practical or even legal, so 
the limbic brain has developed other strategies beyond the more primi-tive physical fight response.
One form of modern aggression is an argument. Although the origi-
nal meaning of the term argument  relates simply to a debate or discus-
sion, the word is increasingly used to describe a verbal altercation. An overheated argument is essentially “fighting” by nonphysical means. The use of insults, ad hominem phrases, counterallegations, denigration of professional stature, goading, and sarcasm are all, in their own ways, the modern equivalents of fighting, because they are all forms of aggression. If you think about it, civil lawsuits can even be construed as a modern and socially sanctioned type of fight or aggression in which litigants ag-gressively argue two opposing viewpoints.
While humans probably engage in physical altercations far less now 
than in other periods in our history, fighting is still a part of our limbic arm o ry . Al th o ugh som e peo pl e ar e m o r e p r on e t o vi ol en ce than oth e rs, our limbic response shows up in many ways other than punching, kick-ing, and biting. You can be very aggressive without physical contact, for example, just by using your posture, your eyes, by puffing out your chest, 
Eye blocking is a very powerful display of 
consternation, disbelief, or disagreement.Fig. 6

Page 48:
3 4  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
or by violating another’s personal space. Threats to our personal space 
elicit a limbic response on an individual level. Interestingly, these territo-rial violations can also create limbic responses on a collective level. When one country intrudes into the space of another, it often results in economic sanctions, severing of diplomatic relations, or even wars.
Obviously, it is easy to recognize when someone uses the fight re-
sponse to commit a physical assault. What I want to identify for you are the not-so-obvious ways in which individuals exhibit some of the more subtle behaviors associated with the fight response. Just as we have seen modified expressions of the freeze and flight limbic reactions, modern decorum dictates that we refrain from acting on our primitive inclina-tions to fight when threatened.
In general, I advise people to refrain from using aggression (verbal or 
physical) as a means of achieving their objectives. Just as the fight response is the act of last resort in dealing with a threat—used only after the freeze and flight tactics have proven unworkable—so too should you avoid it whenever feasible. Aside from the obvious legal and physical reasons for this recommendation, aggressive tactics can lead to emotional turmoil, making it difficult to concentrate and think clearly about the threatening situation at hand. When we are emotionally aroused—and a good fight will do that—it affects our ability to think effectively. This happens be-cause our cognitive abilities are hijacked so that the limbic brain can have full use of all available cerebral resources (Goleman, 1995, 27, 204–207). One of the best reasons for studying nonverbal behaviors is that they can sometimes warn you when a person intends to harm you physically, giv-ing you time to avoid a potential conflict.
COMFORT/DISCOMFORT AND PACIFIERS
T o borrow a phrase from the old Star Trek  series, the “prime directive” of 
the limbic brain is to ensure our survival as a species. It does this by being programmed to mak e us secur e by a v oiding danger or discomf ort and seeking safety or comfort whenever possible. It also allows us to remem-

Page 49:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  35
ber experiences from our past encounters and build upon them (see box 9). 
Thus far we have seen how efficiently the limbic system helps us to deal with threats. Now let’s look at how our brain and body work together to comfort us and give us confidence in our personal safety.
When we experience a sense of comfort (well-being), the limbic brain 
“leaks” this information in the form of body language congruent with our positive feelings. Observe someone resting in a hammock on a breezy day. His body reflects the high comfort being experienced by his brain. On the other hand, when we feel distressed (discomfort), the limbic brain expresses nonverbal behavior that mirrors our negative state of being. Just watch people at the airport when a flight is canceled or delayed. Their bodies say it all. Therefore, we want to learn to look more closely at the comfort and discomfort behaviors we see every day and use them to assess for feelings, thoughts, and intentions.
In general, when the limbic brain is in a state of comfort, this mental 
and physiological well-being is reflected in nonverbal displays of content-ment and high confidence.  When, however, the limbic brain is experienc-
ing discomfort, the corresponding body language is characterized by behaviors emblematic of stress or low confidence . Knowledge of these 
“behavioral markers” or tells will help you determine what a person may be thinking, or how to act or what to expect when dealing with other people in any social or work context.
The Importance of Pacifying Behaviors
Understanding how the limbic system’s freeze, flight, and fight responses 
influence nonverbal behavior is only part of the equation. As you study nonverbal behavior, you will discover that whenever there is a limbic re-sponse—especially to a negative or threatening experience—it will be followed by what I call pacifying behaviors  (Navarro, 2007, 141–163).
These actions, often referred to in the literature as adapters , serve to 
calm us down after we experience something unpleasant or downright nasty (Knapp & Hall, 2002, 41–42). In its attempt to restore itself to “normal conditions,” the brain enlists the body to provide comforting 

Page 50:
3 6  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 9:  A BRAIN THAT DOESN’T FORGET
The limbic brain is like a computer that receives and retains data from the 
outside world. In doing so, it compiles and maintains a record of negative events and experiences (a burned finger from a hot stove, an assault by a human or animal predator, or even hurtful comments) as well as pleasant encounters. Using this information, the limbic brain allows us to navigate a dangerous and often unforgiving world (Goleman, 1995, 10–21). For example, once the limbic system registers an animal as dangerous, that impression becomes embedded in our emotional memory so that the next time we see that animal, we will react instantly. Likewise, if we run into the “class bully” twenty years later, negative feelings of long ago will percolate to the surface once more, thanks to the limbic brain.
The reason it is often difficult to forget when someone has hurt us is 
because that experience registers in the more primitive limbic system, which is the part of the brain designed not to reason but to react (Gole-man, 1995, 207). I recently encountered an individual with whom I was never on the best of terms. It had been four years since I had last seen this person, yet my visceral (limbic) reactions were just as negative as they had been years ago. My brain was reminding me that this individual takes advantage of others, so it was warning me to stay away. This phe-nomenon is precisely what Gavin de Becker was talking about in his in-sightful book, The Gift of Fear .
Conversely, the limbic system also works efficiently to register and 
retain a record of positive events and experiences (e.g., satisfaction of basic needs, praise, and enjoyable interpersonal relationships). Thus, a friendly or familiar face will cause an immediate reaction—a sense of pleasure and well-being. The feelings of euphoria when we see an old friend or recognize a pleasant smell from childhood occur because those encounters have been registered in the “comfort zone” of the memory bank associated with our limbic system.

Page 51:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  37
(pacifying) behaviors. Since these are outward signals that can be read 
in real time, we can observe and decode them immediately and in context.
Pacifying is not unique to our species. For example, cats and dogs lick 
themselves and each other to pacify. Humans engage in much more di-verse pacification behaviors. Some are very obvious, while others are much more subtle. Most people would readily think of a child’s thumb sucking when asked to identify a pacifying behavior, but do not realize that after we outgrow that comfort display, we adopt more discreet and socially acceptable ways to satisfy the need to calm ourselves (e.g., chew-ing gum, biting pencils). Most people don’t notice the more subtle pacify-ing behaviors or are unaware of their significance in revealing a person’s thoughts and feelings. That is unfortunate. To be successful at reading nonverbal behavior, learning to recognize and decode human pacifiers is absolutely critical. Why? Because pacifying behaviors reveal so much about a person’s current state of mind, and they do so with uncanny ac-curacy (see box 10).
I look for pacifying behaviors in people to tell me when they are not 
at ease or when they are reacting negatively to something I have done or said. In an interview situation, such a display might be in response to a s pe c i fi c q u e s ti o n o r c o mm e n t. Be h a v i o r s th a t s i g n al d i s c o m f o rt ( e . g . , leaning away, a frown, and crossed or tense arms) are usually followed by the brain enlisting the hands to pacify (see figure 8). I look for these be-haviors to confirm what is going on in the mind of the person with whom I am dealing.
As a specific example, if every time I ask a subject, “Do you know Mr. 
Hillman?” he responds, “No,” but then immediately touches his neck or m o u th, I kn o w h e is pa cifyin g t o tha t s pecifi c q u es ti o n ( see fi gur e 9 ) . I don’t know if he is lying, because deception is notoriously difficult to de-tect. But I do know that he is bothered by the inquiry, so much so that he has to pacify himself after he hears it. This will prompt me to probe fur-ther into this area of inquiry. Pacifying behaviors are important for an investigator to note, since sometimes they help uncover a lie or hidden in-formation. I find pacifying indicators of greater significance and reliabil-i ty than tryin g t o es ta blis h v e r a ci ty . Th e y h el p t o i d en tify w ha t s pecifi c 

Page 52:
3 8  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 10:  CAPTURED IN THE NECK OF TIME
Neck touching and/or stroking is one of the most significant and frequent 
pacifying behaviors we use in responding to stress. When women pacify using the neck, they often do so by covering or touching their supraster-
nal notch  with their hand (see figure 7). The suprasternal notch is the 
hollow area between the Adam’s apple and the breastbone that is some-times referred to as the neck dimple.  When a woman touches this part of 
her neck and/or covers it with her hand, it is typically because she feels distressed, threatened, uncomfortable, insecure, or fearful. This is a rela-tively significant behavioral clue that can be used to detect, among other things, the discomfort experienced when a person is lying or concealing important information.
I once worked on an investigation where we thought an armed and 
dangerous fugitive might be hiding out at his mother’s home. Another agent and I went to the woman’s house, and when we knocked at the door, she agreed to let us in. We showed our identification and began asking her a series of questions. When I inquired, “Is your son in the house?” she put her hand to her suprasternal notch and said, “No, he’s not.” I noted her behavior, and we continued with our questioning. After a few minutes I asked, “Is it possible that while you were at work, your son could have sneaked into the house?” Once again, she put her hand up to her neck dimple and replied, “No, I’d know that.” I was now confident that her son was in the house, because the only time she moved her hand to her neck was when I suggested that possibility. To make absolutely sure my assumption was correct, we continued to speak with the woman until, as we prepared to leave, I made one last inquiry. “Just so I can final-ize my records, you’re positive  he’s not in the house, right?” For a third 
time, her hand went to her neck as she affirmed her earlier answer. I was now certain the woman was lying. I asked for permission to search the house and, sure enough, her son was hiding in a closet under some blan-kets. She was lucky she was not charged with obstruction of justice. Her 

Page 53:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  39
discomfort in lying to the police about her fugitive son caused her limbic 
system to generate a pacifying behavior that tipped her hand and gave her away.
subjects trouble or distress a person. Knowing these can often lead to 
evincing information previously hidden that might give us new insights.
Types of Pacifying Behaviors
Pacifying behaviors take many forms. When stressed, we might soothe our 
necks with a gentle massage, stroke our faces, or play with our hair. This is done automatically. Our brains send out the message, “Please pacify me now,” and our hands respond immediately, providing an action that will h e l p  m a k e  u s  c o m f o r t a b l e  a g a i n .  S o m e t i m e s  w e  p a c i f y  b y  r u b b i n g  o u r  cheeks or our lips from the inside with our tongues, or we exhale slowly 
Covering of the neck dimple pacifies 
insecurities, emotional discomfort, fear,or concerns in real time. Playing with a necklace often serves the same purpose.
Fig. 7

Page 54:
Rubbing of the forehead is usually a good 
indicator that a person is struggling with something or is undergoing slight to severe discomfort.Fig. 8
Neck touching takes place when there is emotional discomfort, 
doubt, or insecurity.Fig. 9

Page 55:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  41
with puffed cheeks to calm ourselves (see figures 10 and 11). If a stressed 
person is a smoker, he or she will smoke more; if the person chews gum, he or she will chew faster. All these pacifying behaviors satisfy the same re-quirement of the brain; that is, the brain requires the body to do something that will stimulate nerve endings, releasing calming endorphins in the brain, so that the brain can be soothed (Panksepp, 1998, 272).
For our purposes, any touching of the face, head, neck, shoulder, arm, 
hand, or leg in response to a negative stimulus (e.g., a difficult question, an embarrassing situation, or stress as a result of something heard, seen, or thought) is a pacifying behavior. These stroking behaviors don’t help us to solve problems; rather, they help us to remain calm while we do. In other words, they soothe us. Men prefer to touch their faces. Women prefer to touch their necks, clothing, jewelry, arms, and hair.
When it comes to pacifiers, people have personal favorites, some choose 
to chew gum, smoke cigarettes, eat more food, lick their lips, rub their chins, stroke their faces, play with objects (pens, pencils, lipstick, or watches), pull their hair, or scratch their forearms. Sometimes pacification is even more subtle, like a person brushing the front of his shirt or adjust-ing his tie (see figure 12). He appears simply to be preening himself, but in 
Cheek or face touching is a way to 
pacify when nervous, irritated, or concerned.Exhaling with puffed out cheeks is a 
great way to release stress and to pacify. Notice how often people do this after a near mishap.Fig. 10 Fig. 11

Page 56:
4 2  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
reality he is calming his nervousness by drawing his arm across his body 
and giving his hands something to do. These, too, are pacifying behaviors ultimately governed by the limbic system and exhibited in response to stress.
Below are some of the most common and pronounced pacifying be-
haviors. When you see them, stop and ask yourself, “Why is this person pacifying?” The ability to link a pacifying behavior with the specific stressor that caused it can help you understand a person’s thoughts, feel-ings, and intentions more accurately.
Pacifying Behaviors Involving the Neck
Neck touching and/or stroking is one of the most significant and fre-
quent pacifying behaviors we use in responding to stress. One person may rub or massage the back of his neck with his fingers; another may stroke the sides of his neck or just under the chin above the Adam’s apple, tugging at the fleshy area of the neck. This area is rich with nerve end-ings that, when stroked, reduce blood pressure, lower the heart rate, and calm the individual down (see figures 13 and 14).
Men adjust their ties to deal with 
insecurities or discomfort. It also covers the suprasternal notch.Fig. 12

Page 57:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  43
Over the decades that I have studied nonverbal behaviors, I have ob-
served that there are gender differences in the way men and women use the neck to pacify themselves. T ypically, men are more robust in their pacifying behaviors, grasping or cupping their necks just beneath the chin with their hands, thereby stimulating the nerves (specifically, the vagus nerves or the carotid sinus) of the neck, which in turn slow the heart rate down and have a calming effect. Sometimes men will stroke the sides or the back of the neck with their fingers, or adjust their tie knot or shirt collar (see figure 15).
Women pacify differently. For example, when women pacify using 
the neck, they will sometimes touch, twist, or otherwise manipulate a necklace, if they are wearing one (see box 11). As mentioned, the other major way women neck pacify is by covering their suprasternal notch with their hand. Women touch their hands to this part of their neck and/or cover it when they feel stressed, insecure, threatened, fearful, uncom-fortable, or anxious. Interestingly, when a woman is pregnant, I have observed that her hand will initially move toward her neck but at the last moment will divert to her belly, as if to cover the fetus.Men tend to massage or stroke their 
necks to pacify distress. This area is rich with nerves, including the vagus nerve, which when massaged will slow down the heart rate.Men typically cover their necks more 
robustly than women as a way to deal with discomfort or insecurity.
Fig. 13 Fig. 14

Page 58:
4 4  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 11:  THE PACIFYING PENDULUM
Watch a couple as they converse at a table. If the woman begins to play 
with her necklace, most likely she is a little nervous. But if she transitions her fingers to her neck dimple (suprasternal notch), chances are there is an issue of concern to her or she feels very insecure. In most instances, if she is using her right hand on her suprasternal notch, she will cup her right elbow with her left hand. When the stressful situation is over or there 
is an intermission in the uncomfortable part of the discussion, her right hand will lower and relax across her folded left arm. If the situation again becomes tense, her right hand will rise, once again, to the suprasternal notch. From a distance, the arm movement looks like the needle on a 
stress meter, moving from resting (on the arm) to the neck (upright) and back again, according to the level of stress experienced.
Even a brief touch of the neck will serve to assuage 
anxiety or discomfort. Neck touching or massaging is a powerful and universal stress reliever and pacifier.
Fig. 15

Page 59:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  45
Pacifying Behaviors Involving the Face
T ouching or stroking the face is a frequent human pacifying response to 
stress. Motions such as rubbing the forehead; touching, rubbing, or lick-ing the lip(s); pulling or massaging the earlobe with thumb and forefin-ger; stroking the face or beard; and playing with the hair all can serve to pacify an individual when confronting a stressful situation. As men-tioned before, some individuals will pacify by puffing out their cheeks and then slowly exhaling. The plentiful supply of nerve endings in the face make it an ideal area of the body for the limbic brain to recruit to comfort itself.
Pacifying Behaviors Involving Sounds
Whistling can be a pacifying behavior. Some people whistle to calm 
themselves when they are walking in a strange area of a city or down a dark, deserted corridor or road. Some people even talk to themselves in an attempt to pacify during times of stress. I have a friend (as I am sure we all do) who can talk a mile a minute when nervous or upset. Some behaviors combine tactile and auditory pacification, such as the tapping of a pencil or the drumming of fingers.
Excessive Yawning
Sometimes we see individuals under stress yawning excessively. 
Yawning not only is a form of “taking a deep breath,” but during stress, as the mouth gets dry, a yawn can put pressure on the salivary glands. The stretch of various structures in and around the mouth causes the glands to release moisture into a dry mouth during times of anxiety . In these cases it’ s not lack of sleep, but rather stress, that causes the yawning.

Page 60:
4 6  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
The Leg Cleanser
Leg cleansing  is o n e pa cifi ca ti o n beha v i o r tha t o ft en g oes unn oti ced be -
cause it frequently occurs under a desk or table. In this calming or pacify-ing activity, a person places the hand (or hands) palm down on top of the leg (or legs), and then slides them down the thighs toward the knee (see figure 16). Some individuals will do the “leg cleanser” only once, but often it is done repeatedly or the leg merely is massaged. It may also be done to dry off sweaty palms associated with anxiety, but principally it is to get rid of tension. This non v erbal beha vior is w orth looking f or , beca use it is a good indication that someone is under stress. One way to try and spot this 
When stressed or nervous, people will “cleanse” 
their palms on their laps in order to pacify themselves. Often missed under tables, it is a very accurate indicator of discomfort or anxiety.Fig. 16

Page 61:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  47
behavior is to watch people who put one or both arms under the table. If 
they are doing leg cleansing, you will normally see the upper arm and shoulder moving in conjunction with the hand as it rubs along their leg.
In my experience, I find the leg cleanser to be very significant because 
it occurs so quickly in reaction to a negative event. I have observed this ac-tion for years in cases when suspects are presented with damning evidence, such as pictures of a crime scene with which they are already familiar (guilty knowledge). This cleansing/pacifying  behavior  accomplishes two 
things at once. It dries sweaty palms and pacifies through tactile stroking. Y ou can also see it when a seated couple is bothered or interrupted by an unwelcome intruder, or when someone is struggling to remember a name.
In police work, watch for the hand/leg pacifiers to appear when the 
interview session starts, and then note if they progressively increase when difficult questions arise. An increase in either the number or vigor of leg cleansers is a very good indicator that a question has caused some sort of discomfort for the person, either because he has guilty knowledge, is ly-ing, or because you are getting close to something he does not want to discuss (see box 12). The behavior might also occur because the inter-viewee is distressed over what he is required to answer in response to our questions. So, keep an eye on what goes on under the table by monitor-ing the movement of the arms. You will be surprised at how much you can glean from these behaviors.
Heed this cautionary note about leg cleansing. While it is certainly 
seen in people who are being deceptive, I have also observed it in inno-cent individuals who are merely nervous, so be careful not to jump to any conclusions too quickly (Frank et al., 2006, 248–249). The best way to interpret a leg cleanser is to recognize that it reflects the brain’s need to pacify and, therefore, the reasons for the individual’s behavior should be investigated further.
The Ventilator
This behavior involves a person (usually a male) putting his fingers be-
tween his shirt collar and neck and pulling the fabric away from his skin 

Page 62:
4 8  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
(see figure 17). This ventilating action  is often a reaction to stress and is a 
good indicator that the person is unhappy with something he is think-ing about or experiencing in his environment. A woman may perform this nonverbal activity more subtly by merely ventilating the front of her blouse or by tossing the back of her hair up in the air to ventilate her neck.
The Self-Administered Body-Hug
When facing stressful circumstances, some individuals will pacify by 
crossing their arms and rubbing their hands against their shoulders, as if experiencing a chill. Watching a person employ this pacifying behav-ior is reminiscent of the way a mother hugs a young child. It is a protec-tive and calming action we adopt to pacify ourselves when we want to BOX 12:  FROM FACEBOOK TO DISGRACEBOOK
During an interview for a job, an applicant was being questioned by his 
prospective employer. Everything was going well until, toward the end of the interview, the candidate began talking about networking and the im-portance of the Internet. The employer complimented him on this com-ment and made an offhand remark about how most college graduates used the Internet to network in a destructive way, using sites like Face-
book to post messages and pictures that would prove to be an embar-rassment later in the person’s life. At that point, the employer noticed that the candidate did a vigorous leg cleansing with his right hand, wip-ing it along his thigh several times. The employer said nothing at the 
time, thanked the young man for the interview, and walked him out of the office. He then returned to his computer—his suspicion aroused by the candidate’s pacifying behavior—and checked to see if the young man’s profile was on Facebook. Sure enough, it was. And it was not flattering!

Page 63:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  49
feel safe. However, if you see a person with his arms crossed in front, 
leaning forward, and giving you a defiant look, this is not a pacifying 
behavior!
USING PACIFIERS TO READ PEOPLE 
MORE EFFECTIVELY
In order to gain knowledge about a person through nonverbal pacifiers, 
there are a few guidelines you need to follow:
(1)  Recognize pacifying behaviors when they occur. I have provided 
you with all of the major pacifiers. As you make a concerted ef-f o r t  t o  s p o t  t h e s e  b o d y  s i g n a l s ,  t h e y  w i l l  b e c o m e  i n c r e a s i n g l y  easy to recognize in interactions with other people.Ventilating of the neck area relieves stress and emotional discomfort. Rodney 
Dangerfield, the comedian, was famous for doing this when he wasn’t getting any “respect.”
Fig. 17

Page 64:
5 0  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
(2)  Establish a pacifying baseline for an individual. That way you 
can note any increase and/or intensity in that person’s pacifying behaviors and react accordingly.
(3)  When you see a person make a pacifying gesture, stop and ask 
yourself, “What caused him to do that?” You know the indi-vidual feels uneasy about something. Your job, as a collector of nonverbal intelligence, is to find out what that something is.
(4)  Understand that pacifying behaviors almost always are used to 
calm a person after a stressful event occurs. Thus, as a general p rin ci p l e, y o u can as s um e tha t if an in di v i d ual is e n ga g ed in pacifying behavior, some stressful event or stimulus has pre-ceded it and caused it to happen.
(5)  The ability to link a pacifying behavior with the specific 
stressor that caused it can help you better understand the per-son with whom you are interacting.
(6)  In certain circumstances you can actually say or do something to 
see if it stresses an individual (as reflected in an increase in pacify-ing behaviors) to better understand his thoughts and intentions.
(7)  Note what part of the body a person pacifies. This is signifi-
cant, because the higher the stress, the greater the amount of facial or neck stroking is involved.
(8)  Remember, the greater the stress or discomfort, the greater the 
likelihood of pacifying behaviors to follow.
Pacifiers are a great way to assess for comfort and discomfort. In a 
sense, pacifying behaviors are “supporting players” in our limbic reac-tions. Yet they reveal much about our emotional state and how we are truly feeling.
A FINAL NOTE ON OUR LIMBIC LEGACY
You now are in possession of information that is unknown to most people. You are aware that we have a very robust survival mechanism (freeze, 

Page 65:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY  51
flight, or fight) and possess a pacifying system to deal with stress. We are 
fortunate to have these mechanisms, not only for our own survival and suc-cess, but also to use in assessing the sentiments and thoughts of others.
In this chapter, we also learned that (with the exception of certain 
reflexes) all behavior is governed by the brain. We have examined two of the three major “brains” within our cranial vault—the thinking neocor-tex brain and the more automatic limbic brain—and how they differ in terms of their roles. Both brains perform important functions. However, for our purposes, the limbic system is more important because it is the most honest brain—responsible for producing the most significant non-verbal signals for determining true thoughts and feelings (Ratey, 2001, 147–242).
Now that you are familiar with the basics of how the brain reacts to 
the world, you might be wondering if detecting and decoding nonverbal behaviors is all that easy to do. This is a frequently asked question. The answer is yes and no. Once you’ve read this book, some nonverbal body cues will stand out. They literally scream for attention. On the other hand, there are many aspects of body language that are more subtle and, therefore, more difficult to spot. We will focus on both the more obvious and the more subtle behaviors that the limbic brain elicits from the body. I n  t i m e  a n d  w i t h  p r a c t i c e ,  d e c o d i n g  t h e m  w i l l  b e c o m e  n a t u r a l ,  l i k e  looking both ways before you cross a busy street. This brings us to our legs and feet, which propel us across the intersection and provide the fo-cal point of our attention in the next chapter.

Page 66:


Page 67:
THREE
Getting a Leg Up on
Body Language
Nonverbals of the Feet and Legs
 In the first chapter, I asked you to guess which is the most honest part of 
the body—the part that is most lik ely to rev eal a person ’ s true inten-
tions and, thus, be a prime place to look for nonverbal signals that ac-
curately reflect what he or she is thinking. It may surprise you, but the 
answer is the feet! That’s right, your feet, along with your legs, win the 
honesty award hands—or should I say—feet down.
Now I will explain how to gauge the sentiments and intentions of 
others by focusing on their foot and leg actions. In addition, you will 
learn to look for telltale signs that help disclose what’s going on under 
the table, even when you can’t directly watch the lower limbs. First, 
however, I want to share with you why your feet are the most honest 
part of your body, so you’ll gain a better appreciation for why the feet 
are such good gauges of people’s true sentiments and intentions.

Page 68:
5 4  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
AN EVOLUTIONARY “FOOT” NOTE
For millions of years, the feet and legs have been the primary means 
of locomotion for the human species. They are the principal means by which we have maneuvered, escaped, and survived. Since the time our ancestors began to walk upright across the grasslands of Africa, the human foot has carried us, quite literally, around the world. Marvels of engineering, our feet allow us to feel, walk, turn, run, swivel, bal-ance, kick, climb, play, grasp, and even write. And while not as effi-cient at certain tasks as our hands (we lack an opposable big toe), nevertheless, as Leonardo da Vinci once commented, our feet and what they can perform are a testament to exquisite engineering (Mor-ris, 1985, 239).
The writer and zoologist Desmond Morris observed that our feet 
communicate exactly what we think and feel more honestly than any other part of our bodies (Morris, 1985, 244). Why are the feet and legs such accurate reflectors of our sentiments? For millions of years, long before humans spoke, our legs and feet reacted to environmental threats (e.g., hot sand, meandering snakes, ill-tempered lions) instantaneously, without the need for conscious thought. Our limbic brains made sure that our feet and legs reacted as needed by either ceasing motion, run-ning away, or kicking at a potential threat. This survival regimen, re-tained from our ancestral heritage, has served us well and continues to do so today. In fact, these age-old reactions are still so hardwired in us t h a t  w h e n  w e  a r e  p r e s e n t e d  w i t h  s o m e t h i n g  d a n g e r o u s  o r  e v e n  d i s -agreeable, our feet and legs still react as they did in prehistoric times. First they freeze, then they attempt to distance, and finally, if no other alternative is available, they prepare to fight and kick.
This freeze, flight, or fight mechanism requires no high-order cogni-
tive processing. It is reactive. This important evolutionary development benefited the individual as well as the group. Humans survived by see-ing and responding to the same threat simultaneously or by reacting to the vigilant actions of others and behaving accordingly. When the group was threatened, whether or not they all saw the danger, they were able to 

Page 69:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  55
react in synchrony by noting each other’s movements. In our contempo-
rary world, soldiers on patrol will fix their attention on the “point man.” When he freezes, they all freeze. When he lunges for the side of the road, they also take cover. When he charges an ambush, they react in kind. With regard to these life-saving group behaviors, little has changed in five million years.
This ability to communicate nonverbally has assured our survival as a 
species, and even though today we often cover our legs with clothing and our feet with shoes, our lower limbs still react—not only to threats and stressors—but also to emotions, both negative and positive. Thus, our feet 
and legs transmit information about what we are sensing, thinking, and feeling. The dancing and jumping up and down we do today are exten-sions of the celebratory exuberance people exhibited millions of years ago upon the completion of a successful hunt. Be they Masai warriors jump-ing high in place or couples dancing up a storm, throughout the world, the feet and legs communicate happiness. We even stomp our feet in uni-son at ball games to let our team know we are rooting for them.
Other evidence of these “foot feelings” abounds in our everyday life. 
For example, watch children and their foot movements for a real educa-tion in feet honesty. A child may be sitting down to eat, but if she wants to go out and play, notice how her feet sway, how they stretch to reach the floor from a high chair even when the child is not yet finished with her meal. A parent may try to keep her in place, yet the girl’s feet will inch away from the table. Her torso may be held by that loving parent, but the youngster will twist and squirm her legs and feet ever so diligently in the direction of the door—an accurate reflection of where she wants to go. This is an intention cue. As adults, we are, of course, more restrained in these limbic exhibitions, but just barely so.
THE MOST HONEST PART OF OUR BODY
When reading body language, most individuals start their observation at the top of a person (the face) and work their way down, despite the fact 

Page 70:
5 6  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
that the face is the one part of the body that most often is used to bluff 
and conceal true sentiments. My approach is the exact opposite. Having conducted thousands of interviews for the FBI, I learned to concentrate on th e s us pect ’ s f ee t an d l e gs firs t, m o vin g u p w ar d in m y obse rv a ti ons until I read the face last. When it comes to honesty, truthfulness decreases  
as we move from the feet to the head. Unfortunately, law enforcement literature over the last sixty years, including some contemporary works, has emphasized a facial focus when conducting interviews or attempting to read people. Further complicating an honest read is the fact that most interviewers compound the problem by allowing the interviewees to con-ceal their feet and legs under tables and desks.
When you give it some thought, there’s good reason for the deceitful 
nature of our facial expressions. We lie with our faces because that’s what we’ve been taught to do since early childhood. “Don’t make that face,” our parents growl when we honestly react to the food placed in front of us. “ At least look happy when your cousins stop by,” they instruct, and 
you learn to force a smile. Our parents—and society—are, in essence, telling us to hide, deceive, and lie with our faces for the sake of social h a r m o n y .  S o  i t  i s  n o  s u r p r i s e  th a t  w e  t e n d  t o  g e t  p r e t ty  g o o d  a t  i t ,  s o  good, in fact, that when we put on a happy face at a family gathering, we might look as if we love our in-laws when, in reality, we are fantasizing about how to hasten their departure.
Think about it. If we couldn’t  control our facial expressions, why 
would the term poker face  have any meaning? We know how to put on a 
so-called party face, but few pay any attention to their own feet and legs, much less to those of others. Nervousness, stress, fear, anxiety, caution, boredom, restlessness, happiness, joy, hurt, shyness, coyness, humility, awkwardness, confidence, subservience, depression, lethargy, playful-ness, sensuality, and anger can all manifest through the feet and legs. A meaningful touch of the legs between lovers, the shy feet of a young boy meeting strangers, the stance of the angry, the nervous pacing of an ex-pectant father—all of these signal our emotional state and can be readily observed in real time.
If you want to decode the world around you and interpret behavior 

Page 71:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  57
accurately, watch the feet and the legs; they are truly remarkable and hon-
est in the information they convey. The lower limbs must be viewed as a significant part of the entire body when collecting nonverbal intelligence.
SIGNIFICANT NONVERBAL BEHAVIORS 
INVOLVING THE FEET AND LEGS
Happy Feet
Happy feet  are feet and legs that wiggle and/ or bounce with joy . When 
people suddenly display happy feet—particularly if this occurs right after they have heard or seen something of significance—it’s because it has af-fected them in a positive emotional way. Happy feet are a high-confidence  
tell, a signal that a person feels he is getting what he wants or is in an 
advantageous position to gain something of value from another person or from something else in his environment (see box 13). Lovers seeing each other after a long separation will get happy feet at their airport re-union.
You don’t need to look under the table to see happy feet. Just look at a 
person’s shirt and/or his shoulders. If his feet are wiggling or bouncing, his shirt and shoulders will be vibrating or moving up and down. These are not grossly exaggerated movements; in fact, they are relatively subtle. But if you watch for them, they are discernible.
Try this little demonstration for yourself. Sit in a chair in front of a full-
length mirror and begin wiggling or bouncing your feet. As you do, you’ll start to see your shirt and/or shoulders move. While with others, if you’re not watching carefully above the table for these telltale signs of lower-limb behaviors, you might miss them. But if you’re willing to take the time and effort to look, you’ll be able to detect them. The key to using happy feet as an effective nonverbal signal is first to note a person’s foot behavior, and then to watch for any sudden changes that take place (see box 14 on page 59).
Allow me to express two points of caution. First, as with all non-
verbal behavior, happy feet must be taken in context to determine if 

Page 72:
5 8  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 13:  HAPPY FEET MEAN LIFE IS SWEET
A while back, I was watching a poker tournament on television and I saw 
a guy dealt a flush (a powerful hand). Below the table, his feet were going wild! They were wiggling and bouncing like the feet of a child who’s just learned he’s going to Disney World. The player’s face was stoic, his de-meanor above the table was calm, but down near the floor there was a whole lot of shakin’ goin’ on! Meanwhile, I was pointing at the TV set and 
urging the other players to fold their hands and get out of the game. Too bad they couldn’t hear me, because two players called his bets and lost their money to his unbeatable hand.
This player has learned how to put on his best poker face. Obviously, 
however, he has a long way to go when it comes to putting on his best poker feet. Fortunately for him, his opponents—like most people—have spent a lifetime ignoring three-quarters of the human body (from the chest on down), paying no attention to the critical nonverbal tells that can be found there.
Poker rooms aren’t the only place where you see happy feet. I have 
seen them in plenty of meeting rooms and boardrooms and just about everywhere else. While writing this chapter, I was at the airport and over-heard a young mother sitting next to me as she was talking on her cell phone to members of her family. At first, her feet were flat on the ground, but when her son got on the phone, her feet began bouncing up and down effusively. I did not need her to tell me how she felt about her child or his priority in her life. Her feet shouted it to me.
Remember, whether you are playing cards, doing business, or simply 
are engaged in a conversation with friends, happy feet are one of the most honest ways our brains truthfully exclaim, “I am elated.”

Page 73:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  59
they represent a true tell or just excess nervous behavior. For example, 
if a person has naturally jittery legs (a kind of restless-leg syndrome), then it might be hard to distinguish happy feet from an individual’ s normal nervous energy. If the rate or intensity of jiggling increases, however, particularly right after a person hears or witnesses some-thing of significance, I might view that as a potential signal that he or she now feels more confident and satisfied with the current state of affairs.
Second, moving feet and legs may simply signify impatience. Our feet 
often jiggle or bounce when we grow impatient or feel the need to move things along. Watch a class full of students and notice how often their legs and feet will twitch, jiggle, move, and kick throughout the class. This activity usually increases as the class draws to a close. More often BOX 14:  A SIGN OF THE FEET
Julie, a human resource executive for a major corporation, told me she 
began noticing foot behaviors after attending one of my seminars for bank executives. She put her new knowledge to good use just a few days after returning to her job. “I was responsible for selecting company employees for overseas assignments,” she explained. “When I asked one potential candidate if she wanted to work abroad, she responded with bouncing, 
happy feet and an affirmative, ‘Yes!’ However, when I next mentioned that the destination was Mumbai, India, her feet stopped moving altogether. Noting the change in her nonverbal behavior, I asked why she didn’t want to go there. The candidate was astounded. ‘Is it that noticeable? I didn’t 
say anything.  Did someone else say something to you?’ she asked in a 
startled voice. I told the woman I could ‘sense’ she wasn’t pleased with the intended work location. ‘You’re right,’ she admitted, ‘I thought I was being considered for Hong Kong, where I have a few friends.’ It was obvi-ous she did not want to go to India, and her feet left no doubt about her feelings on the matter.”

Page 74:
6 0  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
than not, this is a good indicator of impatience and the need to speed 
things up, not a sign of happy feet. Such activity reaches a crescendo as 
dismissal time approaches in my classes. Perhaps the students are trying to tell me something.
When Feet Shift Direction, Particularly Toward or 
Away from a Person or Object
W e tend to turn toward things we like or are agreeable to us, and that 
includes individuals with whom we are interacting. In fact, we can use this information to determine whether others are happy to see us or would prefer that we leave them alone. Assume you are approaching two people engaged in a conversation. These are individuals you have met before, and you want to join in the discussion, so you walk up to them and say “hi.” The problem is that you’re not sure if they really want your company. Is there a way to find out? Yes. Watch their feet and torso be-havior. If they move their feet—along with their torsos—to admit you, then the welcome is full and genuine. However, if they don’t move their feet to welcome you but, instead, only swivel at the hips to say hello, then they’d rather be left alone.
W e tend to turn away from things that we don’t like or that are dis-
agreeable to us. Studies of courtroom behavior reveal that when jurors don’t like a witness, they turn their feet toward the nearest exit (Dimi-trius & Mazzarella, 2002, 193). From the waist up, the jurors politely face the witness who is speaking, but will turn their feet toward the natural “escape route”—such as the door leading to the hallway or the jury room.
What is true for jurors in a courtroom is also true for person-to-per-
son interactions in general. From the hips up, we will face the person with whom we are talking. But if we are displeased with the conversa-tion, our feet will shift away, toward the nearest exit. When a person turns his feet away, it is normally a sign of disengagement,  a desire to dis-
tance himself from where he is currently positioned. When you are talk-ing with someone and you note that he gradually or suddenly shifts his 

Page 75:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  61
BOX 15:  HOW FEET WAVE GOODBYE
When two people talk to each other, they normally speak toe to toe. If, 
however, one of the individuals turns his feet slightly away or repeatedly moves one foot in an outward direction (in an L formation with one foot toward you and one away from you), you can be assured he wants to take leave or wishes he were somewhere else. This type of foot behavior is another example of an intention cue (Givens, 2005, 60–61). The per-son’s torso may remain facing you out of social diligence, but the feet may more honestly reflect the limbic brain’s need or desire to escape (see figure 18).
Recently I was with a client who had spent almost five hours with me. 
As we were parting for the evening, we reflected on what we had covered that day. Even though our conversation was very collegial, I noticed that my client was holding one leg at a right angle to his body, seemingly want-ing to take off on its own. At that point I said, “You really do have to leave now, don’t you?” “Yes,” he admitted. “I am so sorry. I didn’t want to be rude but I have to call London and I only have five minutes!” Here was a case where my client’s language and most of his body revealed nothing but positive feelings. His feet, however, were the most honest communi-cators, and they clearly told me that as much as he wanted to stay, duty was calling.feet away from you, this is information you need to process. Why did the 
behavior take place? Sometimes it is a signal that the person is late for an appointment and really has to go; other times it is a sign that the person no longer wants to be around you. Perhaps you have said something of-fensive or done something annoying. The shifting foot behavior is a sign that the person wants to depart (see figure 18). However, now it is up to you—based on the circumstances surrounding the behavior—to deter-mine why the individual is anxious to go (see box 15).

Page 76:
6 2  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
The Knee Clasp
There are other examples of intention movements  of the legs that are as-
sociated with an individual who wants to leave his current location. Take note if a person who is sitting down places both hands on his knees in a knee clasp (see figure 19). This is a very clear sign that in his mind, he is ready to conclude the meeting and take leave. Usually this hands-on-knees gesture is followed by a forward lean of the torso and/or a shift of the lower body to the edge of the chair, both intention movements. When 
Where one foot points and turns away during a 
conversation, this is a sign the person has to leave, precisely in that direction. This is an intention cue.Fig. 18

Page 77:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  63
you note these cues, particularly when they come from your superiors, it’s 
time to end your interaction; be astute and don’t linger.
Gravity-Defying Behaviors of the Feet
When we are happy and excited, we walk as if we are floating on air. We 
s e e th i s w i th l o v e r s e n th r al l e d t o be a r o un d e a c h o th e r a s w e l l a s w i th children who are eager to enter a theme park. Gravity seems to hold no boundaries for those who are excited. These behaviors are quite obvious, and yet every day, all around us, gravity-defying behaviors  seemingly elude 
our observation.
When we are excited about something or feel very positive about our 
circumstances, we tend to defy gravity by doing such things as rocking up and down on the balls of our feet, or walking with a bit of a bounce in our step. This is the limbic brain, once again, manifesting itself in our nonverbal behaviors.
Recently I was watching a stranger talk on his cell phone. As he listened, 
his left foot, which had been resting flat on the ground, changed position. The heel of the foot remained on the ground, but the rest of his shoe moved 
Clasping of the knees and shifting of weight on the 
feet is an intention cue that the person wants to get up and leave.Fig. 19

Page 78:
6 4  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
up, so that his toes w ere pointing skywar d ( see figure 20). T o the a v erage 
person, that behavior would have gone unnoticed or been disregarded as insignificant. But to the trained observer, that gravity-defying foot behavior can be readily decoded to mean that the man on the phone had just heard something positive. Sure enough, as I walked by I could hear him say, “Really—that’s terrific!” His feet had already silently said the same thing.
Even when standing still, a person telling a story may inch up to a 
taller stance, elevating himself to emphasize his points, and he may do so repeatedly. The individual does this subconsciously; therefore these el-evating behaviors are very honest cues, since they tend to be true expres-
When the toes point upward as in this 
photograph, it usually means the person is in a good mood or is thinking or hearing something positive.Fig. 20

Page 79:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  65
sions of the emotion attached to the story. They appear in real time along 
with the story line and relate his feelings along with his words. Just as we move our feet to the beat and tempo of a song we like, so too will we move our feet and legs in congruence with something positive we say.
Interestingly, gravity-defying behaviors of the feet and legs are rarely 
seen in people suffering from clinical depression. The body reflects pre-cisely the emotional state of the individual. So when people are excited we tend to see many more gravity-defying behaviors.
Can gravity-defying behaviors be faked? I suppose they can be, par-
ticularly by really good actors and perennial liars, but average people simply don’t know how to regulate their limbic behaviors. When people try to control their limbic reactions or gravity-defying behaviors, it looks contrived. Either they appear too passive or restrained for the situation or not animated enough. A faked upward arm greeting just doesn’t cut it. It looks fake because the arms are not up for very long, and usually the el-bows are bent. The gesture has all the hallmarks of being contrived. True gravity-defying behaviors are usually a very good barometer of a person’s positive emotional state and they look genuine.
One type of gravity-defying behavior that can be very informative to 
the astute observer is known as the starter’s position  (see figure 21). This is 
an action in which a person moves his or her feet from a resting position (flat on the ground) to a ready or “starter’s” position with heel elevated and weight on the balls of the feet. This is an intention cue that tells us the person is getting ready to do something physical, requiring foot move-
ment. It could mean the individual intends to engage you further, is re-ally interested, or wants to leave. As with all nonverbal intention cues, once you learn a person is about to do something, you need to rely on the context and what you know about the individual to make your best as-sessment of what that something is going to be.
Leg Splay
The most unmistakable and easily spotted foot and leg behaviors are ter-
ritorial displays . Most mammals, human or not, can become territorial 

Page 80:
6 6  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
when they are stressed or upset, when they are being threatened, or, con-
versely, when they are threatening others. In each case, they will exhibit behaviors indicating they are trying to reestablish control of their situa-tion and their territory. Law enforcement and military personnel use these behaviors because they are accustomed to being in charge. Some-times, they will try to outdo each other, at which point it becomes farci-cal as each person tries to splay out wider than his colleagues in a subconscious attempt to claim more territory.
When people find themselves in confrontational situations, their feet 
and legs will splay out, not only for greater balance but also to claim greater territory. This sends out a very strong message to the careful ob-server that at a minimum there are issues afoot or that there is potential for real trouble. When two people face off in disagreement, you will never see their legs crossed so that they are off balance. The limbic brain simply will not allow this to take place.
If you observe a person’s feet going from being together to being 
spread apart, you can be fairly confident that the individual is becoming increasingly unhappy. This dominant stance communicates very clearly, “Something is wrong and I am ready to deal with it.” T erritorial leg When feet shift from flat footed to the 
“starter’s position,” this is an intention cue that the person wants to go.
Fig. 21

Page 81:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  67
splays signal the potential for tempers to flare; thus, whether you find 
yourself observing or using this type of nonverbal behavior, you should be on the alert for possible trouble.
Because people often assume a more splayed posture when an argu-
ment escalates, I tell executives as well as law enforcement officers that one way to diffuse a confrontation is to avoid using such territorial dis-plays. If we catch ourselves in a leg-splay posture during a heated ex-change and immediately bring our legs together, it often lessens the confrontation level and reduces the tension.
A few years ago, while I was conducting a seminar, a woman in the 
audience spoke about how her ex-husband used to intimidate her during a n  a r g u m e n t  b y  s t a n d i n g  i n  t h e  d o o r w a y  o f  t h e i r  h o u s e ,  l e g s  s p l a y e d ,  blocking her exit. This is not a behavior to be taken lightly. It resonates visually as well as viscerally and can be used to control, intimidate, and threaten. In fact, predators (e.g., psychopaths, antisocials) often use this leg-splay behavior in conjunction with eye-gaze behavior to control oth-ers. As one prison inmate once told me, “In here, it’s all about posture, how we stand, how we look. We can’t look weak, not for one moment.” I suspect anywhere we might encounter predators, we should be cognizant of our posture and stance.
There are, of course, times when a leg splay can be used to your 
advantage—specifically, when you want to establish authority and control over others for a positive reason. I have had to coach female law enforcement officers to use the leg splay to establish a more ag-gressive stance when responding to unruly crowds in the line of duty. S t a n d i n g  w i th  th e i r  f e e t  t o g e th e r  ( w h i c h  i s  p e r c e i v e d  a s  s u b m i s s i v e )  sends the wrong kind of signal to a would-be antagonist. By moving their feet apart, the female officers can take a more dominant, “I am in charge” stance, which will be perceived as more authoritarian and t h u s  h e l p  t h e m  b e  m o r e  e f f e c t i v e  i n  c o n t r o l l i n g  u n r u l y  i n d i v i d u a l s .  You may want to emphasize to a teenage son how you feel about smoking not by raising your voice, but rather by using a territorial display.

Page 82:
6 8  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
The Territorial Imperative
When discussing leg splay and territorial claims, we must recognize the 
work of Edward Hall, who studied the use of space in humans and other a n i m a l s .  B y  s t u d y i n g  w h a t  h e  t e r m e d  t h e  territorial imperative,  he was 
able to document our spatial needs, which he referred to as proxemics  
(Hall, 1969). Hall found that the more advantaged we are socioeconomi-cally or hierarchically, the more territory we demand. He also found that people who tend to take up more space (territory) through their daily ac-ti vi ti es also ten d to be m o r e self -assur ed, m o r e confi den t, an d o f course m o r e l i k e l y t o be o f hi g h e r s ta tus. Thi s p h e n o m e n o n h as be e n d e m o n -strated throughout human history and in most cultures. In fact, the con-quistadores witnessed it when they arrived in the new world. Once here, they saw the same territorial displays in the people native to the Americas that they had seen in Queen Isabella’s court; to wit, royalty—in any coun-try—can command and is afforded greater space (Diaz, 1988).
While CEOs, presidents, and high-status individuals can claim greater 
space, for the rest of us, it is not so easy. All of us, however, are very protec-tive of our personal space, regardless of its size. We don’t like it when peo-ple stand too close. In his research, Edward Hall found that each of us has a space requirement he called proxemics, that is both personal and cultural in origin. When people violate that space, we have powerful limbic reac-tions indicative of stress. Violations of personal space cause us to become hypervigilant; our pulse races and we may become flushed (Knapp & Hall, 2002, 146–147). Just think about how you feel when someone gets too close, whether in a crowded elevator or while you’re conducting a transac-tion at an ATM machine. I mention these space issues so that the next time someone stands too close or you violate someone’s space, you are aware of the negative limbic arousal that will take place.
Feet/Leg Displays of High Comfort
Careful observation of the legs and feet can help you determine how 
comfortable you are around somebody else and vice versa. Leg crossing  is 

Page 83:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  69
a particularly accurate barometer of how comfortable we feel around 
another person; we don’t use it if we feel uncomfortable (see figure 22). We also cross our legs in the presence of others when we are confident—and confidence is part of comfort. Let’s examine why this is such an hon-est and revealing lower limb behavior.
When you cross one leg in front of the other while standing, you re-
duce your balance significantly. From a safety standpoint, if there were a real threat, you could neither freeze very easily nor run away because, in that stance, you are basically balanced on one foot. For this reason, the limbic brain allows us to perform this behavior only when we feel com-f o r t a b l e  o r  c o n fi d e n t .  I f  a  p e r s o n  i s  s t a n d i n g  b y  h e r s e l f  i n  a n  e l e v a t o r  with one leg crossed over the other, she will immediately uncross her legs and plant both feet firmly on the floor when a stranger steps into the el-evator. This is a sign that the limbic brain is saying, “You can’t take any chances; you may have to deal with a potential threat or problem now, so put both feet firmly on the ground!”
When I see two colleagues talking to each other and they both have 
their legs crossed, I know they are comfortable with each other. First, 
We normally cross our legs when we feel 
comfortable. The sudden presence of someone we don’t like will cause us to uncross our legs.
Fig. 22

Page 84:
7 0  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
this shows a mirroring  of behaviors between two individuals (a comfort 
sign known as isopraxism ) and second, because leg crossing is a high-
comfort display (see figure 23). This leg-cross nonverbal can be used in interpersonal relationships to let the other person know that things are good between the two of you, so good, in fact, that you can afford to re-lax totally (limbically) around that individual. Leg crossing, then, be-comes a great way to communicate a positive sentiment.
Recently I attended a party in Coral Gables, Florida, where I was in-
troduced to two women, both of whom were in their early sixties. During the introduction, one of the women suddenly crossed her legs so that she 
When two people are talking and both have 
crossed their legs, this is an indication that they are very comfortable around each other.Fig. 23

Page 85:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  71
was on one foot leaning toward her friend. I commented, “You ladies 
must have known each other for a long time.” Their eyes and faces lit up, and one asked how I knew this. I said, “Even though you were meeting me—a stranger—for the first time, one of you crossed your legs to favor the other. That is very unusual unless you really like and trust each other.” They both giggled and one inquired, “Can you read minds, too?” T o which I laughed and answered, “No.” After I had explained what gave their long-term friendship away, one of the two women confirmed they had known each other since they were in grade school in Cuba in the for-ties. Once again, the leg cross proved to be an accurate barometer of hu-man sentiments.
Here’s an interesting feature of leg crossing. We usually do it subcon-
sciously in favor of the person we like the most. In other words, we cross our legs in such a way so that we tilt toward the person we favor . This can provide some interesting revelations during family gatherings. In families in which there are multiple children, it is not unusual to have a parent reveal a preference for one child over another by crossing legs so that they tilt toward the child they favor.
B e  a w a r e  t h a t  s o m e t i m e s  c r i m i n a l s ,  w h e n  t h e y  a r e  u p  t o  n o  g o o d ,  
will lean against a wall with their legs crossed when they see police driv-ing by, pretending to be cool. Because this behavior goes counter to the threat the limbic brain is sensing, these criminals usually don’t hold this behavior for very long. Experienced officers on the beat can immediately see that these subjects are posing, not reposing, but to the unknowing, they may look erroneously benign.
Feet/Leg Displays During Courtship
During high-comfort social interactions, our feet and legs will mirror 
those of the other person we are with (isopraxis) and will remain playful. In fact, in the extreme stages of comfort during courtship, the feet will also engage the other person through subtle foot touches or caresses (see box 16).
During courtship, and particularly while seated, a woman will often 

Page 86:
7 2  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 16:  GETTING A TOEHOLD ON ROMANCE
I was in Los Angeles this year giving nonverbal communication training to 
a client who works in the television industry. He was kind enough to take me to dinner at a popular Mexican restaurant near his house. While there, he wanted to continue learning about body language and pointed to a couple seated at a nearby table. He asked, “Based on what you see, do you think they’re getting along with each other?” As we observed the two 
diners, we noted that at first they were leaning in to each other, but as the dinner and conversation progressed, they both leaned back in their chairs away from each other, not really saying much. My client thought things were going sour between them. I said, “Don’t just look above the table, 
look under the table as well.” This was easy to do, as there was no table cloth or other obstacle blocking the underside of the table. “Notice how their feet are very close to each other,” I pointed out. If they weren’t get-ting along, their feet would not be that close together. The limbic brain simply would not allow it. Now that I had him focused on the couple’s feet, we noticed that every once in a while their feet touched or brushed against each other and neither person’s legs retracted. “That behavior is important,” I noted. “It shows they still feel connected.” When the couple got up to leave, the man put his arm around the woman’s waist and they walked out without saying another word. The nonverbals said it all, even though they were not in a talking mood.
If you have ever wondered why there is so much leg touching and 
flirting under tables or in swimming pools, it is probably related to two phenomena. First, when our body parts are out of sight, such as under a table or under water (or under the covers), they seem out of mind—or at least out of the realm of observation. We have all seen people act in a public pool as if they were in private. Second, our feet contain a tremen-dous number of sensory receptors, the pathways of which terminate in an area of the brain that is close to the place in which sensations of the genitalia are registered (Givens, 2005, 92–93). People play footsies under 

Page 87:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  73
the table because it feels good and can be very sexually arousing. Con-
versely, when we don’t like someone or don’t feel close to them, we move our feet away immediately if they accidentally touch beneath the table. As a relationship wanes, a very clear sign couples often miss is that there will be progressively less foot touching of any kind.
play with her shoes and dangle them from the tips of her toes when she 
feels comfortable with her companion. This behavior will, however, quickly cease if the woman suddenly feels uncomfortable. A potential suitor can get a pretty good reading on how things are going based on this “shoe-play” behavior. If, upon approaching a woman (or after talk-ing with her for a while), her shoe play stops, she adjusts her shoe back on her foot, and especially if she follows this by turning slightly away from the suitor and perhaps gathering up her purse, well, in the lan-guage of baseball, that suitor has most likely just struck out. Even when a woman is not touching her suitor with her foot, this type of foot dan-gling and shoe play is movement, and movement draws attention. Therefore, this nonverbal behavior says, “Notice me,” which is just the opposite of the freeze response, and is part of the orienting reflex  that is 
instinctive and draws us near to the things and people we like or desire and away from those things we don’t like, don’t trust, or of which we are not sure.
Seated leg crosses are also revealing. When people sit side by side, 
the direction of their leg crosses become significant. If they are on good terms, the top leg crossed over will point toward the other per-son. If a person doesn’t  like a topic his companion brings up, he will 
switch the position of the legs so that the thigh becomes a barrier (see figures 24 and 25). Such blocking behavior is another meaningful ex-ample of the limbic brain protecting us. If there is congruence in the way both parties are sitting and crossing their legs, then there is har-mony.

Page 88:
In this photo the man has placed his right leg in such a way that the knee 
acts as a barrier between himself and the woman.
Fig. 24
In this photo the man has positioned his leg so that the knee is further 
away, removing barriers between himself and the woman.
Fig. 25

Page 89:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  75
Our Need for Space
E v e r  w o n d e r  w h a t  k i n d  o f  fi r s t  i m p r e s s i o n  y o u ’ v e  m a d e  o n  s o m e o n e ?  
Whether they seem to like you from the outset or, rather, if there could be difficulties brewing? One way to find out is the “shake and wait” ap-proach. Here’s how it works.
Foot and leg behavior is especially important to observe when you 
first meet people. It reveals a lot about how they feel about you. Person-ally, when I first meet someone, I typically lean in, give the person a hearty handshake (depending on the appropriate cultural norms in the situation), make good eye contact, and then take a step back and see what happens next. One of three responses is likely to take place: (a) the person will remain in place, which lets me know he or she is comfortable at that distance; (b) the individual will take a step back or turn slightly away, which lets me know he or she needs more space or wants to be elsewhere; or (c) the person will actually take a step closer to me, which means he or she feels comfortable and/or favorable toward me. I take no offense to the individual’s behavior because I am simply using this opportunity to see how he or she really feels about me.
Remember, the feet are the most honest part of the body. If a person 
needs extra space, I give it. If he or she is comfortable, I don’t have to worry about dealing with a proximity issue. If someone takes a step to-ward me, I know they feel more comfortable near me. This is useful in-formation in any social setting, but also remember you should set limits as to what makes you comfortable when it comes to space.
Walking Style
When it comes to the feet and legs, I would be remiss if I didn’t mention 
the nonverbal cues given off by different styles of walking. According to Desmond Morris, scientists recognize approximately forty different styles of walking (Morris, 1985, 229–230). If that seems like a lot, just recall what you know about the gait of these individuals as portrayed in vari-ous films: Charlie Chaplin, John Wayne, Mae West, or Groucho Marx. 

Page 90:
7 6  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
Each of these movie characters had a distinctive walking style, and their 
personalities were revealed, in part, through their gaits. How we walk often reflects our moods and attitudes. We can walk briskly and inten-tionally, or slowly in a bewildered state. We can stroll, amble, saunter, plod, waddle, limp, shuffle, prowl, bustle, march, promenade, tiptoe, swagger, and so on, to name just a few of the recognized walking styles (Morris, 1985, 233–235).
For observers of nonverbals, these walking styles are important be-
cause changes in the way people normally walk can reflect changes in their thoughts and emotions. A person who is normally happy and gre-garious might suddenly change his or her walking style when told a loved one has been injured. Bad or tragic news may cause a person to sprint out of a room in desperation to help out or it may cause the indi-vidual to walk out phlegmatically as though the weight of the world is on his or her shoulders.
Changes in walking style are important nonverbal behaviors because 
they warn us that something might be amiss, that a problem might be l ur kin g , tha t cir cums tan ces mi g h t ha v e c han g ed—in s h o rt, tha t som e -thing significant might have occurred. A change tells us that we need to assess why the person’s gait has suddenly changed, particularly since such 
information can often aid us in dealing more effectively with that indi-v i d u a l  i n  u p c o m i n g  i n t e r a c t i o n s .  A  p e r s o n ’ s  w a l k  c a n  h e l p  u s  d e t e c t  things he or she is unknowingly revealing (see box 17).
Cooperative vs. Noncooperative Feet
If you are dealing with a person who is socializing or cooperative with 
you, his or her feet should mirror your own. If, however, someone’s feet are pointed away from you while his body faces toward you, you should ask yourself why. Despite the direction of the body, this is not a genuine cooperation profile and is indicative of several things that must be ex-plored. Such a pose reflects either the person’s need to leave or get away soon, a disinterest in what is being discussed, an unwillingness to further assist, or a lack of commitment to what is being said. Note that when 

Page 91:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  77
someone we don’t know approaches us on the street, we usually turn our 
attention to them from the hips up, but keep our feet pointed in the di-rection of travel. The message we are sending is that socially I will be attentive briefly; personally I am prepared to continue or flee.
Over the years, I have conducted training for customs inspectors in the 
United States and abroad. I have learned an incredible amount from them, and I hope they have picked up a few pointers from me. One thing I have taught them is to look for passengers who point their feet toward the exit while turning to the officer to make their customs declaration (see figure 26). While they could simply be in a hurry to catch a flight, this behavior should make the inspector suspicious. In studies, we found that people who BOX 17:  CRIME SHOPPERS
Criminals don’t always realize just how much information they give away. 
When I worked in New York City, my fellow agents and I often watched street predators as they tried to blend into the crowd. One of the ways in which they were unsuccessful in doing so, however, was that they fre-quently walked on the inside of the sidewalk, habitually changing their walking speed as they aimlessly window shopped. Most people have a 
place to go and a task to accomplish, so they walk with purpose. Preda-tors (muggers, drug dealers, thieves, con men) lurk about waiting for their next victim; therefore their postures and pace are different. There is no purposeful direction to their travel until they are about to strike. When a 
predator vectors toward you, whether a beggar or a mugger, the discom-fort you sense is due to the calculations your limbic brain is performing to try to prevent you from becoming the next target. So, next time you’re in a big city, keep an eye out for predators. If you see a person walking around with no purpose who suddenly makes a beeline for you, look out! Better yet, get out—as quickly as possible. Even if you just sense this is happen-ing, listen to your inner voice (de Becker, 1997, 133).

Page 92:
7 8  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
make affirmative declarations such as “I have nothing to declare, officer,” 
but have their feet turned away are more likely to be concealing something they should have declared. In essence, their faces are obliging, their words are definitive, but their feet reveal they are being less than cooperative.
Significant Change in Intensity of Foot and/or Leg Movement
Leg twitching and movement is normal; some people do it all the time, oth-
ers never. It is not indicative of lying—as some erroneously believe—as both 
When a person talks to you with feet pointed 
away, it is a good indication this person wants to be elsewhere. Watch for people who make formal declarations in this position, as this is a form of distancing.Fig. 26

Page 93:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  79
honest and dishonest people will twitch and jiggle. The key factor to con-
sider is at what point do these behaviors start or change. For instance, years ago Barbara Walters was interviewing Academy Awards nominee Kim Basinger prior to the awards ceremony. Throughout the interview, Ms. Bas-inger jiggled her feet and her hands seemed to be very nervous. When Ms. Walters began to ask Ms. Basinger about some financial difficulties and a questionable investment she and her then husband had made, Ms. Basinger’s f oot w en t fr om j iggling to kicking . I t w as instan taneous an d r emar kabl e. Again, this does not mean she was lying or even intended to lie in response to the question, but it was clearly a visceral reaction to a negative stimulus (the question asked) and it reflected her disdain for the inquiry.
Anytime there is a shift from foot jiggling to foot kicking in a seated 
person, according to Dr. Joe Kulis, it is a very good indicator that the person has seen or heard something negative and is not happy about it (see figure 27). While jiggling may be a show of nervousness, kicking is a subconscious way of combating the unpleasant. The beauty of this be-havior is that it is automatic, and most people don’t even recognize they are doing it. You can use this nonverbal body signal to your advantage by creating questions that will evince the leg-kick response  (or any other 
dramatic change in nonverbals) to determine what specific inquiries or 
When a foot suddenly begins to kick, it is usually a good indicator of 
discomfort. You see this with people being interviewed, as soon as a question is asked they do not like.
Fig. 27

Page 94:
8 0  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
Foot Freeze
If a person constantly wiggles or bounces his or her feet or leg(s) and sud-
denly stops, you need to take notice. This usually signifies that the individ-ual is experiencing stress, an emotional change, or feels threatened in some way. Ask yourself why the person’s limbic system kicked their survival in-stincts into the “freeze” mode. Perhaps something was said or asked that might lead to revealing information the person doesn’t want you to know. Possibly the individual has done something and is afraid you will find him BOX 18:  FORGET BONNIE, FIND CLYDE
I vividly recall an interview I conducted with a woman who was thought to 
be a witness to a serious crime. For hours the interview session was going nowhere; it was frustrating and tedious. The interviewee revealed no sig-nificant behaviors; however, I did notice she jiggled her foot all the time. Because it was a relative constant, this behavior was of no consequence until I asked the question, “Do you know Clyde?” Immediately upon hear-ing that question, and even though she didn’t answer (at least not ver-bally), the woman’s foot went from jiggling to an elevated up-and-down kicking motion. This was a significant clue that this name had a negative effect on her. In further questioning, she later admitted that “Clyde” had involved her in stealing government documents from a base in Germany. Her leg-kick reaction was a significant clue to us that there was some-thing more to explore, and in the end her confession proved that suspi-cion to be accurate. Ironically, that betraying behavior probably made her want to kick herself, because it ultimately cost her twenty-five years in a federal prison.subjects are problematic. In this manner, even hidden facts may be elic-
ited from people, whether they answer the question or not (see box 18).

Page 95:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  81
out. The foot freeze  is another example of a limbic-controlled response, the 
tendency of an individual to stop activity when faced with danger.
The Foot Lock and Leave
When an individual suddenly turns his toes inward or interlocks his feet, 
it is a sign that he is insecure, anxious, and/or feels threatened. When interviewing suspects in crimes, I often notice that they interlock their feet and ankles when they are under stress. A lot of people, especially women, have been taught to sit this way, especially when wearing a skirt (see figure 28). However, to lock the ankles in this way, especially over a prolonged period, is unnatural and should be considered suspect, partic-ularly when done by males.
A sudden interlocking of the legs may suggest discom-
fort or insecurity. When people are comfortable, they tend to unlock their ankles.
Fig. 28

Page 96:
8 2  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
Interlocking ankles is again part of the limbic response to freeze in 
the face of a threat. Experienced nonverbal observers have noted how often people who are lying will not move their feet in an interview, seem-ing frozen, or they interlock their feet in such a way as to restrict move-m e n t .  T h i s  i s  c o n s i s t e n t  w i t h  r e s e a r c h  i n d i c a t i n g  t h a t  p e o p l e  t e n d  t o  restrict arm and leg movements when lying (Vrij, 2003, 24–27). Having said this, I want to caution you that lack of movement is not in itself in-dicative of deception; it is indicative of self-restraint and caution, which both nervous and lying individuals utilize to assuage their concerns.
Some individuals take the interlocking feet or ankles one step fur-
ther; they actually lock their feet around the legs of their chair (see figure 29). This is a restraining  (freeze) behavior  that tells us, once again, that 
something is troubling the person (see box 19).
The sudden locking of ankles around the legs of a 
chair is part of the freeze response and is indicative of discomfort, anxiety, or concern.
Fig. 29

Page 97:
GETTING A LEG UP ON BODY LANGUAGE  83
Sometimes a person will signal stress by attempting to hide the feet alto-
gether. When you are speaking with someone, watch to see if that individ-ual moves his or her feet from in front of the chair to under the chair. There is no scientific research (yet) to document what I am about to say. However, over the years, I have observed that when a high-stress question is asked, the respondent will often withdraw his or her feet beneath the chair, which could be seen as a distancing reaction and one that attempts to minimize the exposed parts of the body. This cue can be used to evince discomfort about particular issues and help channel the investigative inquiry. As the observer watches, the interviewee—through his feet and legs—will tell you those things about which he does not wish to talk. As the subject changes and becomes less stressful, the feet will emerge again, expressing the limbic brain’s relief that the stressful topic is no longer being discussed.
SUMMING IT UP
Because they have been so directly critical to our survival throughout hu-man evolution, our feet and legs are the most honest parts of the body. BOX 19:  MAKE THAT A DOUBLE FREEZE
You should always be on the lookout for multiple tells (tell clusters) that 
point to the same behavioral conclusion. They strengthen the likelihood that your conclusion is correct. In the case of the foot lock, watch for the individual who locks his feet around his chair legs and then moves his hand along his pants leg (as if drying his hand on his trousers). The foot lock is a freeze response and the leg rubbing is a pacifying behavior. The 
two, taken together, make it more likely that the person has been uncov-ered; he fears something he has done will be found out and he is experi-encing stress because of this.

Page 98:
8 4  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
Our lower limbs provide the most accurate, uncensored information to 
the alert observer. Used skillfully, this information can help you get a better read on others in all manner of settings. When you combine your knowledge of foot and leg nonverbals with signals from other parts of the body, you become even more capable of understanding what people are thinking, feeling, and intending to do. Therefore, let’s turn our atten-tion to those other parts of the body now. Next stop, the human torso.

Page 99:
FOUR
Torso Tips
Nonverbals of the Torso, Hips, Chest, and Shoulders
This chapter will cover the hips, abdomen, chest, and shoulders, 
collectively known as the torso , or trunk . As with the legs and 
feet, many of the behaviors associated with the torso reflect 
the true sentiments of the emotional (limbic) brain. Because the 
torso houses many vital internal organs, such as the heart, lungs, 
liver, and digestive tract, we can anticipate that the brain will seek to 
diligently protect this area when threatened or challenged. During 
times of danger, whether real or perceived, the brain recruits the rest 
of the body to guard these crucial organs in ways that range from 
the subtle to the more obvious. Let’s look at some of the more com-
mon nonverbal signals of the torso and some examples of how these 
behaviors project what is going on in the brain—particularly the 
limbic brain.

Page 100:
8 6  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
SIGNIFICANT NONVERBAL BEHAVIORS INVOLVING 
THE TORSO, HIPS, CHEST, AND SHOULDERS
The Torso Lean
Like much of our body, the torso will react to perceived dangers by at-
tempting to distance itself from anything stressful or unwanted. For in-stance, when an object is thrown at us, our limbic system sends signals to the torso to move away instantly from that threat. T ypically this will hap-pen regardless of the nature of the object; if we sense movement in our direction, we will pull away, whether from a baseball or a moving car.
In a similar fashion, when an individual is standing next to someone 
who is being obnoxious or someone he does not like, his torso will lean away from that individual (see box 20). Because the torso carries a large portion of our weight and transmits it to the lower limbs, any reorienta-tion of our trunks r equir es ener gy and balance. Ther ef or e, w hen one ’ s torso does lean away from something, it is because the brain demands it; so we can count on the honesty of these reactions. Extra effort and en-e r gy ar e r eq uir ed t o h o l d th ese pos i ti o ns. J us t try t o main tain an y o ff -center position consciously, whether bowing down or leaning away, and you will find that your body soon tires. However, when such off-balance behavior is performed because your brain subconsciously decides it’s a necessity, you will hardly feel it or notice it.
Not only do we lean away from people who make us uncomfortable, 
we may also blade away (turn slightly) by degrees from that which does not appeal to us or we grow to dislike. Not long after it opened, I took my daughter to the Holocaust Museum in Washington, D.C., which is something every visitor to D.C. should do. As we walked around the memorable exhibits, I noticed how young and old first approached each exhibit. Some walked right up, leaning into it while trying to absorb ev-ery nuance. Some approached hesitantly, while others would draw near, then begin to turn slowly and slightly away as the inhumanity of the Nazi regime encroached on their senses. Some, stunned by the depravity they were witnessing, turned 180 degrees and faced the other way, as 

Page 101:
TORSO TIPS  87
BOX 20:  WILY OR WEIRD?
Years ago I was stationed in the New York office of the FBI. During my ten-
ure there, I had numerous opportunities to ride the trains and subways in and out of the city. It didn’t take long to recognize the many different tech-niques people used to claim territory while on public transport. It seemed there was always someone who sat on the seat but whose body would sway from side to side so as to impose on others or whose arms would flail wildly 
at times while holding one of the straps. These individuals always seemed to possess more space around them because no one wanted to get near them. When forced to sit or stand next to these “weirdos,” people would lean at the torso as far as possible so as not to come in contact with them. 
You have to ride the subways in New York to appreciate this. I am con-vinced that some passengers purposely acted strangely and exaggerated their body movements to keep people at a distance, away from their torsos. In fact, a long-time resident of New York once told me, “If you want to keep the hordes at bay, act like you’re nuts!” Perhaps he was right.
they waited for their friends to finish examining the display. Their brains 
were, saying, “I can’t handle this,” and so their bodies turned away. The human species has evolved to the point that not only physical proximity to a person we dislike can cause us to lean away, but even images of un-pleasant things, such as photographs, can cause a torso lean.
As a careful observer of human behavior, you need to be aware that 
distancing sometimes takes place abruptly or very subtly; a mere shifting of body angle of just a few degrees is enough to express negative sentiment. For example, couples who are pulling apart emotionally will also begin to pull apart physically. Their hands don’t touch as much, and their torsos actually avoid each other . When they sit side by side, they will lean away from each other. They create a silent space between them, and when they are forced to sit next to each other , such as in the back of an automobile, they will only rotate toward each other with their heads, not their bodies.

Page 102:
8 8  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
Ventral Denial and Ventral Fronting
These torso displays that reflect the limbic brain’s need to distance and 
avoid are very good indicators of true sentiments. When one person in a relationship feels that something is wrong with the way things are going, he or she is most likely sensing a subtle degree of physical distancing in his or her partner. The distancing can also take the form of what I call ventral denial . Our ventral (front) side, where our eyes, mouth, chest, 
breasts, genitals, etc. are located, is v ery sensiti v e to things w e lik e and dislike. When things are good, we expose our ventral sides toward what we favor, including those people who make us feel good. When things go wrong, relationships change, or even when topics are discussed that we disfavor, we will engage in ventral denial, by shifting or turning away. The ventral side is the most vulnerable side of the body, so the limbic brain has an inherent need to protect it from the things that hurt or bother us. This is the reason, for example, we immediately and subcon-sciously begin to turn slightly to the side when someone we dislike ap-proaches us at a party. When it comes to courtship, an increase in ventral denial is one of the best indicators that the relationship is in trouble.
In addition to visual input, the limbic brain can also have a reaction to 
conversations we find distasteful. Watch any TV talk show with the vol-ume off and notice how the guests will lean away from each other as they present contrary arguments. Not long ago, I was watching the Re-publican presidential debates and noted that even though the candidates were spaced quite far apart, they still leaned away from each other when issues were brought up with which they disagreed.
The opposite of ventral denial is ventral exposure or—as I like to call 
it—ventral fronting . We display our ventral sides to those we favor. When 
our children come running to us for a hug, we move objects, even our arms, out of the way so that we can give them access to our ventral sides. We ventrally front because this is where we feel the most warmth and comfort. In fact, we use the phrase turning our back  to express negativity 
toward someone or something, because we offer our ventral sides to those we care for and our backs to those we don’t.

Page 103:
TORSO TIPS  89
Similarly, we demonstrate comfort by using our torsos and shoulders 
to lean in the direction of that which we favor. In a classroom, it’s not unusual to see students leaning toward a favorite teacher without realiz-ing they are bent forward, almost out of their chairs, hanging on every word. Remember the scene from the movie Raiders of the Lost Ark  when 
the students were leaning forward to hear their professor? Their nonver-bal behavior clearly indicated they admired him.
Lovers can be seen leaning across a café table, their faces coming close 
to each other to gain more intimate visual contact. They front their ven-tral selves toward each other, exposing their most vulnerable parts. This is a natural, evolutionary response of the limbic brain that has social ben-efit. By moving closer together and exposing our ventral (weakest) side when we lik e someone or something, we sho w that we are giving our -selves in an unrestrained manner. Reciprocating this positioning by mir-roring, or isopraxism, demonstrates social harmony by rewarding the intimacy and showing it is appreciated.
Nonverbal limbic behaviors of the torso, such as leaning, distancing, 
and ventral exposure or denial, happen all the time in boardrooms and other meetings. Colleagues who share a similar point of view will sit closer together, turn more toward each other ventrally, and will lean har-moniously nearer each other. When people disagree, they will hold their bodies firm, avoid ventral fronting (unless challenged), and will most lik ely lean a way from each other ( see figures 30 and 3 1 ). This behavior subconsciously tells others, “I am not in agreement with your idea.” As w i t h  a l l  n o n v e r b a l s ,  t h e s e  a c t i o n s  n e e d  t o  b e  a n a l y z e d  i n  c o n t e x t .  F o r  example, people new to a job may seem stiff and inflexible at a meeting. Rather than reflecting dislike or disagreement, this rigid posture and limited arm activity may simply indicate that they are nervous in a new environment.
Not only can we use this information to read the body language of 
others, but we must also always remember that we are projecting our own nonverbals. During conversations or meetings, as information and opinions flow, our feelings about the news and viewpoints also will flow and be reflected in our ever-changing nonverbal behaviors. If we hear 

Page 104:
People lean toward each other when there is high comfort and 
agreement. This mirroring or isopraxis starts when we are babies.
Fig. 30
We lean away from things and people we don’t like, even from col-leagues when they say things with which we don’t agree.Fig. 31

Page 105:
TORSO TIPS  91
something distasteful one minute and something favorable the next, our 
bodies will reflect this shift in our feelings.
A very powerful way to let others know that you agree with them, 
or are consciously contemplating what they are saying, is to lean toward them or to ventrally front them. This tactic is especially effective when you are in a meeting and you don’t have the opportunity to speak up.
The Torso Shield
When it is impractical or socially unacceptable to lean away from some-
one or something we dislike, we often subconsciously use our arms or objects to act as barriers (see figure 32). Clothing or nearby objects 
A sudden crossing of the arms during a 
conversation could indicate discomfort.Fig. 32

Page 106:
9 2  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
(see box 21) also serve the same purpose. For instance, a businessmen may 
suddenly decide to button his jacket when talking to someone with whom he is uncomfortable, only to undo the jacket as soon as the conversation is over.
Buttoning a jacket, of course, is not always an indication of discomfort; 
often men will button their jackets to formalize a setting or to show defer-ence to their boss. It is not the kind of total comfort we might find at, say, a 
barbecue, but neither does it indicate uneasiness. Clothing and how we at-tend to our clothes can influence perceptions and are even suggestive of how approachable or open we are to others (Knapp & Hall, 2002, 206–214).BOX 21:  PILLOW TALK
When we see individuals suddenly protecting their torsos, we can assume 
they are not comfortable and that they sense themselves to be in some kind of threatening or dangerous situation. In 1992, while working with the FBI, I interviewed a young man and his father in a hotel room in the Boston area. The father had agreed, reluctantly, to bring the young man to the interview. While sitting on the hotel couch, the young man grabbed 
one of the couch pillows and held it close to his chest for most of the three-hour interview. Despite the presence of his father, this young man felt vulnerable and, therefore, needed to tightly clutch a “security blan-ket.” While the barrier was only a pillow, it must have been quite effective 
for this individual, because there was just no getting through to him. I found it remarkable that when the subject was neutral, such as when we talked about his involvement in sports, he would put the pillow aside. However, when we spoke of his possible complicity in a major crime, he would retrieve the pillow and press it tightly against his torso. It was clear that the only time his limbic brain felt the need to protect his torso was when he felt threatened. He never did reveal anything at this meeting, but the next time he was interviewed, the comforting pillows were conspicu-ously absent!

Page 107:
TORSO TIPS  93
It has always been my impression that presidents often go to Camp 
David to accomplish in polo shirts what they can’t seem to accomplish in business suits forty miles away at the White House. By unveiling them-selves ventrally (with the removal of coats) they are saying, “I am open to you.” Presidential candidates send this same nonverbal message at rallies when they get rid of their jackets (their shields, if you will) and roll up their shirtsleeves in front of the “common folk.”
Perhaps not surprisingly, women tend to cover their torsos even more 
so than men, especially when they feel insecure, nervous, or cautious. A woman may cross her arms over her stomach, just under the breasts, in an effort to shield her torso and comfort herself. She may cross one arm across her front and grab the opposite arm at the elbow, forming a bar-rier to her chest. Both behaviors subconsciously serve to protect and insu-late, especially in social situations where there is some discomfort.
On campus, I often see women place their notebooks across their 
chests as they walk into class, particularly for the first few days. As their comfort level increases, they will shift to carrying their notebooks at their sides. On test days, this chest-shielding  behavior tends to increase, 
even among male students. Women will also use backpacks, briefcases, or purses to shield themselves, especially when sitting alone. Just as you may pull a comforter on while watching television, putting something across the ventral torso protects and soothes us. Objects we draw toward us, especially ventrally, are usually placed there to provide the comfort we need at that moment, whatever the situation. When you witness people protecting their torsos in real time, you can use it as an accurate indicator of discomfort on their parts. By carefully assessing the circum-stances, the source of that discomfort may allow you to help them or at least better understand them.
Men, for whatever the reason (perhaps to be less conspicuous), will 
shield their torsos, but in more subtle ways. A male may reach across the front of himself to play with his watch, or, as Prince Charles of England often does when he is in public, reach over and adjust his shirtsleeve or play with his cuff links. A man may also fix his tie knot, perhaps longer than usual, as this allows for the arm to cover the ventral area of the chest 

Page 108:
9 4  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
and neck. These are forms of shielding that transmit that the person is 
slightly insecure at that moment.
I was in a supermarket checkout line waiting for the woman in front 
of me to conclude her transaction. She was evidently using a debit card, and the machine kept rejecting it. Each time she swiped the card and entered her pin number, she would await the machine’s response with her arms crossed across her chest, until finally she gave up and walked away, exasperated. Each time the card was rejected, her arms and grip got tighter, a clear sign that her annoyance and discomfort were escalat-ing (see figures 33 and 34).
Children can be seen to cross or lock their arms across their bodies 
when upset or being defiant, even at an early age. These shielding behav-iors come in a variety of forms—from arms crisscrossed over the belly to crossing the arms high with hands grasping opposite shoulders.
Students often ask me if it means there is something wrong with 
them if they sit in class and cross their arms in front of themselves. The question is not whether something is wrong, nor does this posture mean they are blocking the teacher out; arms intertwined across the front is a 
In public, many of us comfortably cross 
our arms while waiting or listening to a speaker. Around the house we rarely sit this way unless something is bothering us, like waiting for a late ride.Crossed arms with hands tightly gripping 
the arms is definitely an indication of discomfort.
Fig. 33 Fig. 34

Page 109:
TORSO TIPS  95
very comfortable pose for many people. However, when a person sud-
denly crosses arms and then interlocks them tightly, with a tight hand grip, this is indicative of discomfort. Remember, it is by gauging changes from baseline postures that we can note when uneasiness arises. W atch t o see if th e pe rson opens u p v en trall y as th ey becom e m o r e r elax ed. I find that when I give lectures, many of the participants initially will sit with their arms crossed, and then loosen them over time. Obviously, something happens to elicit this behavior; probably greater comfort with their surroundings and their instructor.
It could be argued that women (or men) cross their arms simply be-
cause they are cold. But this does not negate the nonverbal meaning, since cold is a form of discomfort. People who are uncomfortable while being interviewed (e.g., suspects in criminal investigations, children in trouble with their parents, or an employee being questioned for improper con-duct) often complain of feeling cold during the interview. Regardless of the reason, when we are distressed the limbic brain engages various sys-tems of the body in preparation for the freeze/flight-or-fight survival re-sponse. One of the effects is that blood is channeled toward the large muscles of the limbs and away from the skin, in case those muscles will n eed t o be used t o esca pe o r com ba t th e thr ea t. As bl ood is di v e rted t o these vital areas, some people lose their normal skin tone and will actually look pale or as if they are in shock. Since blood is the main source of our body warmth, diverting blood away from the skin and into deeper mus-cles makes the body’s surface feel cooler (see box 22) (LeDoux, 1996, 131–133). For example, in the interview mentioned earlier in which the young man clutched the pillow, he complained of being cold the whole time we were there, even though I turned the air conditioner off. Both his father and I were fine; he was the only one complaining about the temperature.
The Torso Bow
Bowing at the waist is performed almost universally as a sign of subservi-
ence, respect, or humility when feeling honored, such as with applause. Notice, for example, how the Japanese and, to a lesser extent in modern 

Page 110:
9 6  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
times, the Chinese, bow out of respect and deference. We show that we 
are subservient or of lower status when we automatically assume a bowed or kowtow  position, achieved principally by bending the torso.
For Westerners, kowtowing does not come easily, especially when it is 
a conscious act. However, as we expand our horizons and interact with more and more people from various countries of the Near East and Far East, it behooves us to learn to bow our torsos slightly, particularly when meeting those who are elderly and have earned respect. This simple ges-ture of reverence will be recognized by those whose cultures show defer-ence by such posture and will confer a social advantage upon those Westerners willing to demonstrate it (see box 23). Incidentally, eastern Europeans, especially older ones, still like to click their heels and bow slightly out of respect. Every time I see this, I think how charming it is BOX 22:  WHY YOU CAN’T STOMACH CERTAIN TOPICS
Did you ever wonder why you get an upset stomach if there is an argu-
ment at the dinner table? When you are upset, your digestive system no longer has as much blood as it needs for proper digestion. Just as your limbic system’s freeze, flight, or fight response shunts blood away from the skin, it likewise diverts blood from your digestive system, sending blood to your heart and limb muscles (especially the legs) to prepare for 
your escape. The upset stomach you feel is a symptom of that limbic arousal. The next time an argument ensues during a meal, you will recog-nize the limbic response of distress. A child whose parents fight at the dinner table really can’t finish his meal; his limbic system has trumped 
alimentation and digestion to prepare them for escape and survival. Along these lines, it is interesting to note how many people vomit after experi-encing a traumatic event. In essence, during emergencies the body is saying that there is no time for digestion; the reaction is to lighten the load and prepare for escape or physical conflict (Grossman, 1996, 67–73).

Page 111:
TORSO TIPS  97
that people still show graciousness and deference in today’s world. 
Whether done consciously or subconsciously, the torso bow is a nonver-bal gesture of regard for others.
Torso Embellishments
Because nonverbal communication also includes symbols, we have to 
give some attention to clothing and other accoutrements that are worn on the torso (including the body, in general). It is said that clothing makes the man, and I would agree, at least in terms of appearances. Numerous studies have established that what we wear, whether a suit or casual clothes—even the colors of our outfits, a blue suit as opposed to a brown suit—will influence others (Knapp & Hall, 2002, 206–214).BOX 23:  A SUPREME KOWTOW
The universality of torso bows was dramatically illustrated to me in an old 
newsreel of General Douglas MacArthur while he was assigned to the Philippine government before World War II broke out. It shows a U.S. Army officer exiting MacArthur’s office after dropping off some docu-ments. As he leaves, the officer kowtows on his way out, backing out of the room. No one asked him to do it; the behavior was automatically 
prompted by the officer’s brain to let the higher-status person know that his position was clear—it was a recognition that MacArthur was in charge. (Gorillas, dogs, wolves, and other nonhuman animals also demonstrate this subservient posturing.) Remarkably, the officer bowing out of the 
room was none other than the man who one day would become the Su-preme allied commander of Europe, architect of the Normandy invasion, and our thirty-fourth president: Dwight David Eisenhower. Incidentally, years later, upon learning that Eisenhower was running for president, MacArthur commented that Eisenhower was the “finest clerk” he’d ever had (Manchester, 1978, 166).

Page 112:
9 8  WHAT EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
Clothing says a lot about us and can do a lot for us. In a sense, our 
torsos are billboards upon which we advertise our sentiments. During courtship, we dress up to enchant; while working we dress for success. Similarly, the high school letter jacket, the police badge, and the mili-tary decoration are all worn on the torso as a way of calling attention to our achievements. If we want others to notice us, the torso is where it’s at. When the president gives his State of the Union address before Con-gress, the red-garbed women you notice in a sea of blue and gray are those who, like birds displaying their plumage, are wearing vibrant colors to be noticed.
Clothing can be very subdued, very sinister (consider “skinhead” at-
t i r e  o r  a  “ g o th i c ”  l o o k ) ,  o r  v e r y  fl a m b o y a n t  ( s u c h  a s  th a t  o f  m u s i c i a n s  Liberace or Elton John), reflecting the mood and/or personality of the wearer. We alternatively can use torso adornments or bare parts of our torsos to attract others, to show off how muscular or fit we are, or to ad-vertise where we fit in socially, economically, or occupationally. This may explain why so many people fret excessively about what to wear when attending a high-profile function or going on a date. Our personal adornments allow us to show our pedigree or our allegiance to a particu-lar group—for example, wearing the colors of our favorite team.
Clothing can be very descriptive, such as revealing when people are 
celebrating or mourning, if they are of high or low status, whether they conform to social norms or are part of a sect (e.g., Hasidic Jew, Amish farmer, or Hare Krishna). In a way, we are what we wear (see box 24). For years people told me I dressed like an FBI agent, and they were right. I wore the standard agent uniform: navy blue suit, white shirt, burgundy tie, black shoes, and short hair.
Obviously, because we have certain employment roles that require 
specific attire and since we make conscious choices when it comes to clothing, we need to be careful in our assessment of what it signifies. After all, the guy standing outside your door dressed in a telephone re-pairman’s uniform just might be a criminal who purchased or stole the outfit to gain access to your home (see box 25 on page 100).
Even with the caveats just mentioned, clothing needs to be considered 

Page 113:
TORSO TIPS  99
BOX 24:  YOU ARE WHAT YOU WEAR
Imagine this scenario. You are walking down a sparsely populated street 
one evening and you hear someone coming up behind you. You can’t see the person’s face or hands clearly in the dark, but you can determine he is wearing a suit and tie and carrying a briefcase. Now, imagine the same dark sidewalk, but this time picture that all you can see behind you is the outline of a person wearing disheveled and baggy clothing, sagging 
pants, a tilted cap, a stained T-shirt, and tennis shoes that are worn and raggedy. In either case, you can’t see the person well enough to discern any other details—and you are assuming it is a man, based simply on the clothing. But based on the attire alone, you will likely draw different con-
clusions about the potential threat each person poses to your safety. Even if the approaching pace of each man is the same, as the person nears, your limbic brain will activate, even though your reaction to these individ-uals will be based exclusively on your reaction to their clothing. Your assess-ment of the situation will either make you feel comfortable or uncomfortable, even potentially frightened.
I am not going to tell you which person would make you feel more 
comfortable; that is for you to decide. But right or wrong, all other things being equal, it is their clothing that often greatly influences what we think of individuals. Although clothing, itself, cannot hurt us physically, it can affect us socially. Consider how judgmental and suspicious some Ameri-cans have become since September 11, 2001, when they see a person in clothing that reflects a Middle Eastern background. And furthermore, imagine how some Middle Eastern Americans have been made to feel as a result.
I tell college students that life is not always fair and that, unfortu-
nately, they will be judged by their attire; therefore they need to think carefully about their clothing choices and the messages they are sending to others.

Page 114:
100 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
in the overall scheme of nonverbal assessment. For that reason, it is im-
portant that we wear clothes that are congruent with the messages we want to send others, assuming we want to influence their behavior in a way that is positive or beneficial to us.
When choosing your wardrobe and accessories, always remain cogni-
zant of the message you are sending with your clothing and the meaning tha t o th e r s m a y pe r ce i v e f r o m y o ur d r es s. Al so co n s i d e r tha t al th o u g h you may deliberately want to use your attire to send a signal to one per-son or group of people at a specific time and place, you may have to pass a lot of other people who are not as receptive to your message along the way!
At seminars I frequently ask the question, “How many of you were 
dressed by your mother today?” Of course everyone laughs, and no one  
raises his hand. Then I say, “Well, then, you—all of you—chose to dress the way you did.” That is when they all look around them and, perhaps for the first time, realize that they could do a better job of dressing and presenting themselves. After all, before two people first meet, the only input each has to go on about the other is physical appearance and other nonverbal communications. Perhaps it’s time to consider how you are 
being perceived.BOX 25:  WE AREN’T ALWAYS WHO WE APPEAR TO BE
Clearly, we have to be careful when we assess a person on the basis of 
clothing only, as it can sometimes lead to the wrong conclusion. I was in London last year at a very nice hotel just four blocks from Buckingham Palace where all of the staff, including the maids, wore Armani suits. If I had seen them on the train going to work, I could easily have been misled as to their relative social status. So remember, because it is culturally 
prescribed and easily manipulated, clothing is only part of the nonverbal picture. We assess clothing to determine whether it is sending a message, not to judge people based on their attire.

Page 115:
TORSO TIPS  101
Preening
When we are physically and mentally well, we take care of our appear-
ance, preening and grooming ourselves accordingly. Humans are not unique in this regard, as birds and mammals engage in like behaviors. When we are physically or mentally ill, on the other hand, the posture of the torso and shoulders, as well as our overall appearance, may signal our poor health (American Psychiatric Association, 2000, 304–307, 350–352). Many unfortunate homeless people are afflicted with schizophrenia and rarely do they attend to their attire. Their clothes are soiled and grimy, and many of these individuals will even fight attempts by others to get them to bathe or wear clean clothing. The mentally depressed person will stoop as he walks or stands, the weight of the world seemingly bringing him down.
The phenomenon of poor grooming during illness and sadness has 
been noted around the world by anthropologists, social workers, and health-care providers. When the brain is saddened or we are ill, preen-ing and presentation are among the first things to go (Darwin 1872, c h a p .  3 ,  p a s s i m ) .  F o r  e x a m p l e ,  p a t i e n t s  r e c o v e r i n g  f r o m  s u r g e r y  m a y  walk down the hospital hallway with hair disheveled and in gowns with their backsides exposed, not caring about personal appearance. When you are really ill, you may lie around the house looking more unkempt than you ever would be normally. When a person is really sick or really traumatized, the brain has other priorities, and preening is simply not one of them. Therefore, within context, we can use an overall lack of personal hygiene and/or grooming to make assumptions about a per-son’s state of mind or state of health.
Torso Splays
Splaying out on a couch or a chair is normally a sign of comfort. How-
ever, when there are serious issues to be discussed, splaying out is a ter-ri t o rial o r d o minan ce dis p la y ( see fi gur e 3 5) . T ee na g e r s, in parti cular , often will sit splayed out on a chair or bench, as a nonverbal way of 

Page 116:
102 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
dominating their environment while being chastised by their parents. 
This splay behavior  is disrespectful and shows indifference to those in 
authority. It is a territorial display that should not be encouraged or 
tolerated.
If you have a child who does this every time he or she is in serious 
trouble, you need to neutralize this behavior immediately by asking your child to sit up and, if that fails, by nonverbally violating his or her space (by sitting next to or standing closely behind him or her). In short order, your child will have a limbic response to your spatial “invasion,” which will cause him or her to sit up. If you allow your child to get away with torso splays during major disagreements, don’t be surprised if he or she loses respect for you over time. And why not? By allowing such displays, you are basically saying, “It’s OK to disrespect me.” When these kids grow up, they may continue to splay out inappropriately in the workplace when they should be sitting up attentively. This is not conducive to lon-
Splaying out is a territorial display, which is OK in your own 
home but not in the work place, especially during a job interview.Fig. 35

Page 117:
TORSO TIPS  103
gevity on the job, since it sends a strong negative nonverbal message of 
disrespect for authority.
Puffing Up the Chest
Humans, like many other creatures (including some lizards, birds, dogs, 
and our fellow primates), puff up their chests when trying to establish territorial dominance (Givens, 1998–2007). Watch two people who are angry with each other; they will puff out their chests just like silverback gorillas. Although it may seem almost comical when we see others do it, puffing of the chest should not be ignored, because observation has shown that when people are about to strike someone their chests will puff out. You see this on the school grounds when kids are about to fight. It can also be seen among professional boxers as they goad each other verbally before a major fight—chest out, leaning into each other, pro-claiming their certitude of winning. The great Muhammad Ali did this better than anyone during prefight events. Not only was he threatening he was also funny—all part of the show—which made for good theater and, of course, ticket sales.
Baring the Torso
Sometimes in street fights, people getting ready to strike out at an oppo-
n e n t  w i l l  d i s r o b e— r e m o v i n g  a n  a r t i c l e  o f  c l o t h i n g  l i k e  a  s h i r t  o r  h a t .  Whether this is done simply to flex one’s muscles, to protect the dis-carded clothing, or to rob the opponent of some type of hold he can use to his advantage, no one is sure. In any case, if you should get into an ar-gument with someone and he or she takes off a hat, shirt, or other article of clothing, most likely a fight is in the offing (see box 26).
Breathing Behavior and the Torso
When a person is under stress, the chest may be seen to heave or expand 
and contract rapidly. When the limbic system is aroused and engaged for 

Page 118:
104 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
flight or fight, the body attempts to take in as much oxygen as possible, 
either by breathing more deeply or by panting. The stressed individual’s chest is heaving because the limbic brain is saying, “Potential problem—step up oxygen consumption in case we suddenly have to escape or fight!” When you see this type of nonverbal behavior in an otherwise healthy person, you should consider why he or she is so stressed.
Shoulder Shrugs
Full and slight shoulder shrugs can mean a lot in context. When the boss 
asks an employee, “Do you know anything about this customer’s com-plaint?” and the employee answers, “No,” while giving a half shrug, chances are the speaker is not committed to what was just said. An hon-est and true response will cause both shoulders to rise sharply and equally. Expect people to give full (high) shoulder shrugs when they confidently support what they are saying. There is nothing wrong with saying, “I don’t know!” while both shoulders rise up toward the ear. As discussed previously, this is a gravity-defying behavior that normally signifies the BOX 26: ONE TIME YOU DON’T WANT THE 
SHIRT OFF HIS BACK
Years ago I witnessed two neighbors verbally sparring over a sprinkler 
system that had accidentally sprayed a freshly waxed vehicle. As things escalated, one of the neighbors started unbuttoning his shirt. It was then that I knew fists were going to fly. Sure enough, the shirt came off and the chest bumping began between them. This was a mere precursor to the punching, which soon followed. It seemed incredible that grown men would fight over water spots on a car. What was really remarkable, how-ever, was the chest bumping between the two guys, as though they were gorillas. It was actually embarrassing to watch them engage in such a lu-dicrous torso display. It’s just something that shouldn’t happen.

Page 119:
TORSO TIPS  105
person is comfortable and confident with his or her actions. If you see a 
person’s shoulders only partially rise or if only one shoulder rises, chances are the individual is not limbically committed to what he or she is saying and is probably being evasive or even deceptive (see figures 36 and 37).
Weak Shoulder Displays
Speaking of shoulders, be aware of the person who, while conversing or 
in reaction to a negative event, moves his or her body so the shoulders begin to slowly rise toward the ears in a manner that makes the neck seem to disappear (see figure 38). The key action here is that the shoul-d e r s  r i s e  s l o w l y .  T h e  p e r s o n  d i s p l a y i n g  th i s  b o d y  l an gu a g e  i s  b a s i c a l l y  try in g t o m ak e hi s h ea d d i sa p pear , l ik e a tu rtl e . S u c h an in d i v i d ual i s lacking confidence and is highly uncomfortable. I have seen this behav-ior in business meetings when the boss comes in and says, “OK, I want to hear what everyone has been doing.” As different people around the room proudly talk about their accomplishments, the marginal employees Partial shoulder shrugs indicate lack of 
commitment or insecurity.We use shoulder shrugs to indicate lack 
of knowledge or doubt. Look for both shoulders to rise; when only one side rises, the message is dubious.
Fig. 36
 Fig. 37

Page 120:
106 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
will seemingly sink lower and lower, their shoulders rising higher and 
higher in a subconscious attempt to hide their heads.
T h i s  t u r tl e l i k e  b e h a v i o r  a l s o  s h o w s  u p  i n  f a m i l i e s  w h e n  th e  f a th e r  
says, “It really hurt my feelings to find that someone broke my reading lamp without telling me.” As the father looks at each of his children, one will be looking down, shoulders rising toward the ears. You will also see these weak shoulder displays demonstrated by a losing football team as they walk back to the locker-room—their shoulders seeming to swallow up their heads.
Shoulders rising toward the ears causes 
the “turtle effect”; weakness, insecurity, and negative emotions are the message. Think of losing athletes walking back to the locker room.Fig. 38

Page 121:
TORSO TIPS  107
ONE FINAL COMMENT ON THE 
TORSO AND SHOULDERS
There are a lot of books on nonverbal behavior that neglect to mention 
the torso and the shoulders. That is unfortunate, because a lot of valuable information comes to us from this portion of our physique. If you have neglected to observe this area of the body for nonverbal clues, I hope the material in this chapter has convinced you to expand your observational range to include the “billboard” of the body. Its reactions are particularly honest because, with so many of our vital organs housed there, the limbic brain takes great care to protect our torsos.

Page 122:


Page 123:
FIVE
Knowledge Within Reach
Nonverbals of the Arms
 In terms of observing body language, the arms are largely underappreci-
ated. We typically place much more emphasis on the face and hands 
when seeking to read nonverbal behavior. In observing for signs of 
comfort, discomfort, confidence, or other displays of feeling, the arms 
serve well as emotive transmitters.
Since the time our primate ancestors began to walk upright, human 
a r m s w e r e f r e e t o be u s e d in r e m a r k a b l e w a y s . Ou r a r m s a r e a b l e t o  
carry loads, cast blows, grasp objects, and lift us off the ground. They 
are streamlined, agile, and provide a formidable first response to any 
outside threat, especially when used in conjunction with the lower limbs. 
If someone throws an object at us, our arms rise to block it, instinctively 
and accurately. Our arms, like our feet and legs, are so reactive and so 
oriented to protect us that they will rise up to defend us even when do-
ing so is illogical or ill-advised. In my work in the FBI, I have seen indi-

Page 124:
110 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
viduals shot in the arm as they used their upper limbs in an attempt to 
defend themselves from handgun fire. The thinking brain would real-ize that an arm simply cannot stop a bullet, yet the limbic brain will cause our arms to lift and precisely block a projectile traveling at 900 feet per second. In forensic science, such injuries are known as defense 
wounds .
Every time you bump your arm—especially if you run into some-
thing sharp—consider that it may have just protected your torso from a potentially lethal blow. Once, while holding an umbrella above my head during a Florida rainstorm, the sharp edge of my car door swung back on me and struck me in the side, breaking a rib that was left unprotected by my upraised arm. Since that time, I have a painful memory that re-minds me to appreciate my arms and how they protect me.
Because our arms—like our feet—are designed to assist with our sur-
v i v a l ,  t h e y  c a n  b e  c o u n t e d  u p o n  t o  r e v e a l  t r u e  s e n t i m e n t s  o r  i n t e n t i o n s .  Therefore, unlike the more variable and deceptive face, the upper limbs provide solid nonverbal cues that more accurately portray what we—and those around us—are thinking, feeling, or intending. In this chapter we will examine the interpretation of some of the most common arm displays.
SIGNIFICANT NONVERBAL BEHAVIORS 
INVOLVING THE ARMS
Gravity-Related Arm Movements
The degree to which we move our arms is a significant and accurate indica-
tor of our attitudes and sentiments. These movements can range from sub-dued (restrained and constricted) to exuberant (unrestrained and expansive). When we are happy and content, our arms move freely, even joyfully. Watch children at play. Their arms move effortlessly while they interact. You will see them pointing, gesticulating, holding, lifting, hugging, and waving.
When excited, we don’t restrict our arm movements; in fact our natural 
tendency is to defy gravity and raise our arms high above our heads (see 

Page 125:
KNOWLEDGE WITHIN REACH  111
box 27). When people are truly energized and happy, their arm motions 
defy gravity. As previously mentioned, gravity-defying behaviors are asso-ciated with positive feelings. When a person feels good or confident, he s w i n g s  h i s  a r m s  a f fi r m a t i v e l y ,  s u c h  a s  w h i l e  w a l k i n g .  I t  i s  t h e  i n s e c u r e  person who subconsciously restrains his arms, seemingly unable to defy the weight of gravity.
Candidly tell a colleague about a drastic and costly mistake she just 
made at work and her shoulders and arms will sink down and droop. Ever have that “sinking feeling”? It’s a limbic response to a negative event. Negative emotions bring us down physically. Not only are these limbic responses honest, but they happen in real time. We leap and thrust our arms in the air the moment the point is scored, or our shoulders and arms sink when a referee rules against us. These gravity-related behaviors com-municate emotions accurately and at the precise moment we are affected. Further, these physical manifestations can be contagious, whether at a football stadium, a rock concert, or in a gathering of great friends.
Arm Withdrawal
When we are upset or fearful, we withdraw our arms. In fact, when we are 
i n j u r e d ,  t h r e a t e n e d ,  a b u s e d ,  o r  w o r r i e d ,  o u r  a r m s  c o m e  s t r a i g h t  t o  o u r  BOX 27:  “GET YOUR HANDS IN THE AIR!”
You don’t need a gun to get people to raise their hands above their heads. 
Make them happy and they’ll do it automatically. In fact, during a holdup is probably the only time individuals will simultaneously keep their hands 
high and be unhappy. Think of how athletes exchange high fives after a good play; watch football fans raise their arms skyward after the hometown team scores a touchdown. Gravity-defying arm actions are a common re-sponse to joy and excitement. Whether in Brazil, Belize, Belgium, or Bo-tswana, arm waving is a truly universal display of how elated we feel.

Page 126:
112 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
sides or they close across our chests. This is a survival tactic that helps pro-
tect the individual when a real or perceived danger is sensed. Take, for in-stance, the mother who is worried about her son while he is playing with rougher children. She will often cross her arms and fold them across her abdomen. She wants to intervene but stands aside and restrains herself by holding her arms, hoping the play proceeds without injury.
W h e n  t w o  p e o p l e  a r e  a r gu i n g ,  th e y  m a y  b o th  e n g a g e  i n  th i s  arm-
withdrawal behavior,  a very protective behavior of which neither party 
may be aware. This restraint has survival value; it protects the body while presenting a nonprovocative position. In essence, they are holding themselves back, since extending the arms might be construed as an at-tempt to strike and injure the other party, causing a fight to ensue.
Self-restraint can assist us not only in dealing with others but also in 
dealing with ourselves when we need to be comforted. For instance, in-juries or pain in the torso and arms often cause us to restrict arm move-ment in an attempt to self-soothe or pacify. We may withdraw the arms toward the painful body region. If you have ever experienced severe in-testinal distress, your arms were most likely drawn to your abdomen for comfort. At moments like this, the arms don’t move outward; the limbic system requires that they attend to our needs closer to home.
Restriction of Arm Movement
Restriction of arm movements, arm freeze , particularly when it occurs in 
children, can sometimes have more sinister implications. In studying indi-cators of child abuse, it has been my experience that these children will re-strict their arm movements in the presence of abusive parents or other predators. This makes perfect survival sense, since all animals, especially predators, orient to war d mo v ement. Instincti v ely , the abused child learns that the more he moves, the more likely he is to be noticed, and then poten-tially targeted by an abuser. So the child’s limbic system instinctively self-regulates to make sure his arms do not attract attention. Arm-freeze behavior can serve to warn caring adults, whether teachers, neighbors, rela-tives, or friends, that a child might be the victim of abuse (see box 28).

Page 127:
KNOWLEDGE WITHIN REACH  113
BOX 28:  GUARDIANS ALL
For exercise, I swim regularly at a local pool. Years ago, I became aware 
of a young girl who, while normally gregarious and outgoing, would re-strain her arms whenever her mother was around. I noticed this response on several different days. In addition, I noted that the mother frequently spoke to this young girl using stern, caustic, and demeaning words. In the physical interactions I witnessed, she often handled her daughter roughly 
rather than lovingly, which was very unsettling, but not to the degree of being criminal. On the final day that I saw the girl, I noticed some bruises just above her elbows on the ventral side of her arms (the part of the arm that faces the torso when the arm is hanging normally at the side). At this 
point, I could no longer keep my suspicions to myself.
I notified members of the pool staff that I suspected child abuse and 
asked them to please keep an eye on the little girl. An employee told me she was a “special needs” child, and the bruises might be caused by her lack of coordination. I sensed that the gravity of my uneasiness wasn’t registering, so I went to the director of the facility and expressed my con-cerns. I explained that defense wounds from falling do not manifest on the ventral side of the upper arms, but rather on the elbows or dorsal side (the outside) of the arms. Also, I knew it was not coincidence that this child looked like an automaton every time her mother came near. I was relieved to learn that this matter was later referred to authorities, after oth-ers at the swim facility made the same observations.
Let me make a very important point. If you are a parent, teacher, 
camp counselor, or school resource officer and you see children severely 
change or restrain their arm behavior around their parents or other adults, at a minimum it should arouse your interest and promote further observa-tion. Cessation of arm movement is part of the limbic system’s freeze re-sponse. To the abused child, this adaptive behavior can mean survival.

Page 128:
114 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
Maybe I just can’t get the FBI out of me, but when I see children at a 
playground, I can’t help but glance at their arms to note any bruises or injuries. Sadly, there is so much child abuse in the world, and during my training I was instructed to look for the signs of neglect and abuse in children and others. Not only as a result of my career in law enforce-ment, but also from my years as a father, I know what falling or bump-ing bruises look like and where they occur on the body. Bruises received through abuse are not the same. Their locations and appearance are dif-ferent, and these differences can be detected by the trained eye.
As previously stated, humans use their arms to defend themselves, a 
predictable limbic reaction. Because children use their arms to block their bodies as their primary means of defense (adults may use objects), a flailing arm is often the first thing an abusive parent will grab. Parents who aggressively seize children in this way will leave pressure marks on the ventral side (the inside) of the arms. Especially if the parent shakes the child in this position, the marks will be deeper in color (from greater pressure) and have the larger shape of the adult hand or the elongated shape of the thumb or fingers.
While physicians and public safety officers routinely see marks such 
as this on young victims or patients, many of us are just not aware of their prevalence or significance. If we all learn to observe children care-fully and look for the obvious signs of maltreatment, we can all help to protect innocent children. In saying this, I am not trying to make you paranoid or unreasonably suspicious, just aware. The more knowledge-able all caring adults are about the appearance of defense wounds and other abusive injuries in children, and the more we observe for such inju-ries, the safer our children will be. We want them to be happy and swing their arms with joy, not restrain them in fear.
Restricted arm behavior is not limited to children. It can also be seen 
in adults for a variety of reasons (see, for example, box 29).
A friend of mine, who was a customs inspector in Yuma, Arizona, 
told me that one of the things he noticed at the border was how people carried their handbags and purses when they came into the country. A person who was worried about the contents of her handbag—whether 

Page 129:
KNOWLEDGE WITHIN REACH  115
because of their value or their illegality—tended to hold on to the bag 
tighter, especially as she neared the customs desk. Not only do important items tend to be better protected with the arms, but also those things we do not want noticed.
USING ARM CUES TO ASSESS FOR 
MOOD OR FEELINGS
If you establish an adequate baseline by observing a specific individual’s 
arm behaviors over a period of time, you can detect how he is feeling by his arm movements. For instance, arm movements can let you know how someone is feeling upon returning home from work. After a tough day or w h e n  f e e l i n g  d e j e c t e d  o r  s a d ,  t h e  a r m s  w i l l  b e  l o w  a t  t h e  p e r s o n ’ s  s i d e ,  shoulders drooping. Armed with this understanding, you can comfort the person and help him or her recover from a hard day. In contrast, watch BOX 29:  SHOPLIFTERS’ TELL
One of my earliest experiences with restrained arm behavior occurred 
more than thirty-five years ago at a bookstore where I was employed to spot shoplifters. From a lofty perch above the sales floor, I soon learned that these lawbreakers were relatively easy to spot. Once I understood the typical body language of shoplifters, I could identify them daily—sur-prisingly, even as they walked in the door. First, these individuals tended 
to look around a lot. Second, they tended to use fewer arm movements than regular shoppers. It was as though they were trying to make them-selves smaller targets as they moved about the store. However, their lack of arm movements actually made them stand out more prominently—and 
essentially allowed me to better focus on them as they went about their larcenous ways.

Page 130:
116 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
people being reunited after a long absence. They hold their open arms 
straight out. The meaning is clear, “Come here, I want to hold you!” This beautiful sight is reminiscent of when our own parents warmly reached out to us and we responded in kind. Our arms reach out, defying gravity and opening up our entire body, because our feelings are so genuinely positive.
What happens with our arm movements when we don’t really feel 
po s i ti v e e m o ti o n s ? Y e a r s a g o , w h e n m y d a u g h t e r w a s y o un g , w e w e r e attending a family get-together, and as a relative approached me, rather than holding my arms straight out, they were only outstretched from the elbows, with my upper arms close at my sides. Interestingly, my daughter likewise adjusted her arms when this relative reached out to hug her. Subconsciously, I had transmitted that this person was welcome, but that I was not extremely excited to see her. My daughter responded in kind, later telling me that she did not like this relative, either. Whether my da u gh t e r ’ s f eelin gs w e r e o ri ginal o r w h e th e r s h e ha d p i c k ed u p o n m y sentiments toward this relative, we had both subconsciously demon-strated, with our less-than-stretched-out arms, how we really felt.
Arm behaviors also help to communicate such everyday messages as: 
“hello,” “so long,” “come here,” “I don’t know,” “over there,” “down here,” “up there,” “stop,” “go back,” “get out of my sight,” and “I can’t believe w ha t j ust ha ppened !” Man y of these gestur es coul d be un derstood an y -where in the world and often are employed to overcome language barri-ers. There are also numerous obscene gestures that involve the arms, some specific to a given culture, and others that are universally understood.
Arm Cues that Isolate
Certain arm behaviors relay the message, “Don’t come close to me; don’t 
touch!” For instance, watch some university professors, doctors, or lawyers as they walk down a hallway, or for that matter, look at the Queen of Eng-land or her husband, Prince Philip. When people place their arms behind their backs, first they are saying, “I am of higher status.” Second, they are transmitting, “Please don’t come near me; I am not to be touched.” This behavior is often misunderstood as merely a pensive or thinking pose, but 

Page 131:
KNOWLEDGE WITHIN REACH  117
unless seen in someone studying a painting at a museum, for example, it is 
not. Putting the arms behind the back is a clear signal that means, “Don’t get close; I don’t want to make contact with you” (see figure 39). Adults can convey this message to each other and to children—even pets are sensitive to segregating gestures of the arms (see box 30). Imagine how isolating it must be for a child growing up in a household where each time he yearns to be held, his mother withdraws her arms behind her back. Such nonver-bal messages, unfortunately, have lasting effects on a youngster and, all too often, like other forms of neglect and abuse, are later imitated and trans-mitted to the next generation.
Sometimes called the “regal stance,” 
arms behind the back mean “don’t draw near.” You see royalty using this behavior to keep people at a distance.Fig. 39

Page 132:
118 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 30:  A PET PEEVE
Animal trainers tell me that dogs can’t stand it when humans withdraw 
their gaze and their arms. In essence, our behavior is telling the dog, “I will not touch you.” If you own a dog, try this experiment. Stand in front of your pet with your outstretched arms and hands in front of you, but not touching him. Then withdraw your arms behind your back and watch what happens. I think you’ll discover the dog will react negatively.
Humans dislike it when we feel unworthy of being touched. When a 
couple walks together and one or the other’s arms are behind the back, they are restraining themselves. Obviously, closeness or intimacy is not reflected by this behavior. Note how you feel when you extend your arm to shake someone’s hand and he does not respond. When we reach out for physical contact and it is not reciprocated, we feel rejected and de-jected.
There is ample scientific research that suggests that touch is very im-
portant for the well-being of humans. Health, mood, mental develop-ment, and even longevity are said to be influenced by how much physical contact we have with others and how often positive touching takes place (Knapp & Hall, 2002, 290–301). We have all read about studies where merely stroking a dog lowers a person’s heart rate and serves as a calming agent. Perhaps this is true because pets are typically so unconditional in their affections that we never have to worry about reciprocation.
As a species, we have learned to use touch as a barometer of how we 
feel. We reach toward the things we really like and hold unpleasant things at arm’s length. If you hand someone a dirty diaper for disposal, notice how the immediate reaction is to grasp it with as few fingers as possible and hold the arm away from the body. No one receives training in this, yet we all do it, because the limbic brain limits contact with ob-jects that are disagreeable, unhealthy, or dangerous to us.

Page 133:
KNOWLEDGE WITHIN REACH  119
This arm-distancing  phenomenon occurs not only when we encounter 
objects we don’t like, but also when we are around people we don’t enjoy. Our arms will act as either barriers or blocking mechanisms (like a run-ning back stiff-arming a would-be tackler) to protect and/or distance us from threats or anything we deem negative in our environment. You can learn a lot about how a person feels about someone or something by not-ing whether the arm either engages or distances from the individual or object in question. Watch people at the airport or on a packed sidewalk and notice how they use their arms to protect themselves or to block oth-ers from getting too close as they make their way through the crowd. Then note how people with whom you interact greet you in social or 
business situations. I think you’ll start to see that the saying “keeping someone at arm’s length” has real meaning and practical consequences.
TERRITORIAL DISPLAYS OF THE ARMS
In addition to using our arms to protect us or keep people away, they can also be used to mark territory. In fact, as I am writing this paragraph, I am on an Air Canada flight to Calgary, and my very large seat neighbor and I have been jockeying for armrest territory nearly the entire flight. At the moment, I seem to be losing; I have a small corner of the armrest, but he dominates the rest and therefore my whole left side. All I can do is lean toward the window. Eventually, I decided to give up trying to carve out any additional territory, so he won and I lost. But at least I salvaged an example for this book from his territorial display. Incidents like this hap-pen to all of us every day in elevators, doorways, or classrooms. In the end, if there is no accommodation or compromise, someone ends up be-ing the “loser” and no one likes to feel that way.
You also see territorial displays in boardrooms or meeting rooms where 
one person will spread his material about and use his elbows to dominate a considerable piece of the conference table at the expense of others. Ac-cording to Edward Hall, territory, in essence, is power (Hall, 1969; Knapp & Hall, 2002, 158–164). Claiming territory can have very powerful and 

Page 134:
120 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
negative consequences—both short-lived and long-term—and the result-
ing battles can range from small to great. T erritorial disputes encompass everything from a turf issue on a crowded subway to the war fought be-tween Argentina and Britain over the Falkland Islands (Knapp & Hall, 2002, 157–159). Now, here I sit, months after that flight to Calgary, and as I edit this chapter, I can still sense the discomfort I felt when my seatmate hogged the armrest. Clearly, territorial displays are significant to us, and our arms help assert our dominance to others with whom we overlap in space.
Notice how confident or high-status individuals will claim more ter-
ritory with their arms than less confident, lower-status persons. A domi-nant man, for example, may drape his arm around a chair to let everyone know that this is his domain or, on a first date, might confidently throw an arm over a woman’s shoulder as though she were his property. Fur-ther, with regard to “table manners,” be aware that higher-status indi-viduals will usually claim as much territory as possible immediately upon sitting down, spreading their arms or their objects (briefcase, purse, pa-pers) on the table. If you are new to an organization, watch for those in-dividuals who either use their personal material (notebooks, calendars) or their arms to claim a larger piece of real estate than most. Even at the conference table, real estate is equated with power and status; so be ob-servant for this nonverbal behavior and use it to assess an individual’s real or perceived status. Alternatively, the person who sits at the confer-ence table with his elbows against his waist and arms draped between his legs sends a message of weakness and low confidence.
Arms Akimbo
One territorial behavior used to assert dominance and project an image 
of authority is known as arms akimbo.  This nonverbal behavior involves 
a person extending both arms out in a V pattern with the hands placed (thumbs backward) on the hips. Watch police officers or military person-nel in uniform when they are talking to each other. They almost always assume the arms-akimbo posture. Although this is part of their authori-

Page 135:
KNOWLEDGE WITHIN REACH  121
tative training, it doesn’t resonate well in the private sector. Military per-
sonnel leaving the service to enter the business world would be well advised to soften up that image so they don ’ t come across so authorita-tively (see figure 40). Minimizing arms akimbo can often ameliorate that military bearing that civilians often find disconcerting (see box 31).
For women, arms, akimbo may have particular utility. I have taught 
women executives that it is a powerful nonverbal display that they can em-ploy when confronting males in the boardroom. It is an effective way for anyone, especially a woman, to demonstrate that she is standing her ground, confident, and unwilling to be bullied. T oo often young women enter the 
Arms akimbo is a powerful territorial 
display that can be used to establish dominance or to communicate that there are “issues.”Fig. 40

Page 136:
122 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 31:  THE WRONG ARMS OF THE LAW
People who question the power of nonverbals to affect the behaviors of 
others might want to consider what happens when police use the arms-akimbo display at the wrong times. There are situations when using it can not only destroy police officers’ effectiveness, but also endanger their lives.
Subconsciously, arms akimbo is a powerful display of authority and 
dominance, as well as a claim to territory. During a domestic dispute, if a police officer performs this display, it tends to exacerbate the feelings of those in the house and may escalate the situation. This is particularly true if the officer exhibits this posture in a doorway, blocking the exit of the 
homeowners. Territorial displays such as arms akimbo arouse passions, since “every man’s home is his castle,” and no “king” wants an outsider controlling his space.
Another potentially dangerous situation relating to the use of the 
arms-akimbo display involves young police officers who are taken off of their regular patrol duties to work undercover. When these undercover neophytes enter an establishment for the first time, such as a bar they are attempting to infiltrate, they may stand with arms akimbo. While this is something they are accustomed to doing, they have not earned the right to engage in such an authoritarian or territorial display among those they don’t know. They advertise inadvertently that they are cops or the heat. Interviews with numerous criminals have revealed that this territo-rial arm display is one of the things they look for in trying to make (iden-tify) undercover officers. Except for those in authority, most civilians rarely stand with arms akimbo. I always remind training officers and su-pervisors to be aware of this and make sure that undercover officers are broken of this habit so they do not give away who they are and place their lives in peril.

Page 137:
KNOWLEDGE WITHIN REACH  123
workplace and are bullied nonverbally by males who insist on talking to 
them with arms akimbo in a show of territorial dominance (see figure 4 1 ). Aping this behavior—or using it first—can serve to level the playing field for women who may be reluctant to be assertive in other ways. Arms akimbo is a good way of saying that there are “issues,” “things are not good,” or “I am standing my ground” in a territorial display (Morris, 1985, 195).
There is a variant to the traditional arms akimbo (which is usually 
performed with hands on hips with thumbs facing toward the back) in which the hands are placed on the hips, but the thumbs face forward 
Women tend to use arms akimbo less 
than men. Note the position of the thumbs in this photograph.In this photo the arms are akimbo, but 
note that the thumbs are forward. This is a more inquisitive, less authoritarian position than in the previous photo, where the thumbs are back in the “there are issues” position.
Fig. 41 Fig. 42

Page 138:
124 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
(see figure 41 and 42). It is often seen when people are inquisitive, yet 
concerned. They may approach a situation with this curious arms akimbo stance (thumbs forward, hands on hips, elbows out) to assess what is go-ing on, and then rotate their hands to “thumbs backwards” to establish a more dominant stance of concern if necessary.
Hooding Effect
Another territorial display—similar to arms akimbo—can often be seen 
during business meetings and other seated social encounters when a per-son leans back and interlaces his hands behind his head (see figure 43). I spoke to a cultural anthropologist about this behavior, and we both con-cluded that it is reminiscent of the way in which a cobra “hoods” to alert other animals of his dominance and power. This hooding effect  makes us 
l a r g e r  th a n  l i f e  a n d  t e l l s  o th e r s ,  “ I  a m  i n  c h a r g e  h e r e . ”  T h e r e  i s  a l s o  a 
Interlaced hands behind the head are 
indicative of comfort and dominance. Usually the senior person at a meeting will pose or “hood” this way.Fig. 43

Page 139:
KNOWLEDGE WITHIN REACH  125
pecking order to this and other dominance displays. For instance, while 
waiting for a meeting to begin, the office supervisor may assume the in-terlaced hands-behind-the-head-elbows-out display. However, when the boss comes into the room, this territorial hooding display will stop. Claim-ing territory is for those of high status or those in charge. Thus it is the boss’s right to assume this behavior while everyone else will be expected to bring their hands down to the table in an appropriate show of deference.
Dominant Pose
Often, individuals will use their arms to simultaneously emphasize a point 
a n d  c l a i m  t e r r i t o r y .  T h i s  h a p p e n s  f r e q u e n t l y  d u r i n g  i n t e r a c t i o n s  w h e r e  people are in disagreement over an issue. I recall a recent incident during a layover in New York wherein a hotel guest approached the front desk with his arms close to his body and asked the clerk on duty for a favor. When the favor was rejected, the guest shifted his request to a demand, and his arms shifted as well—spreading farther and farther apart, claiming more and more territory as the conversation became increasingly heated. This arm spread  behavior  i s  a  p o w e r f u l  l i m b i c  r e s p o n s e  e m p l o y e d  t o  e s t a b l i s h  
dominance and emphasize a person’s point of view (see figure 44). As a general rule, the meek will pull in their arms; the strong, powerful, or in-dignant will spread them out to claim more territory (see box 32).
In business meetings, a speaker who takes (and maintains) a large ter-
ritorial footprint is likely very confident about what is being discussed (see figure 45). Spread-out arms is one of those nonverbals with high ac-c u r a c y  b e c a u s e  i t  i s  l i m b i c  i n  o r i g i n  a n d  p r o c l a i m s ,  “ I  a m  c o n fi d e n t . ”  Conversely, note how quickly someone who is splayed out over several chairs will withdraw his arms when questioned about something that makes him feel uncomfortable (see box 33).
Arm Behaviors in Courtship
In courtship behavior, the man will often be the first to put his arm 
around his date, particularly when there is a chance that other males 

Page 140:
Fingertips planted spread apart on a surface are a 
significant territorial display of confidence and authority.
Fig. 44
Arms spread out over chairs tell the world you are feeling 
confident and comfortable.
Fig. 45

Page 141:
KNOWLEDGE WITHIN REACH  127
BOX 32:  SPREADING ARMS SHOULD SPREAD ALARMS
Several years ago I was involved in training American Airlines security 
personnel overseas. One of the employees pointed out to me that ticket agents can often identify passengers who will become problematic by how wide they position their arms when they are at the counter. From that day forward I have looked for this behavior and have witnessed it count-less times during confrontations.
I was at the airport (yes, once again!) when I overheard a passenger 
being told of a new regulation that required him to pay a surcharge for his overweight luggage. Immediately—as if on cue—this man splayed his arms so far apart on the counter that it actually forced him to bend at the waist. During the argument that ensued, the airline employee stepped back and crossed his arms in front of his chest and informed the passen-ger that unless he cooperated and calmed down he wouldn’t be allowed on the airplane. Incidentally, it’s not every day one gets to see two remark-able arm behaviors all at once, in what became an arm wrestling match, at a distance.
might try to encroach on his woman. Or he will plant an arm behind 
his date and pivot around her so that no one can claim or violate this ter-ritory. Watching courtship rituals can be very enlightening and enter-taining—particularly when you see males subconsciously staking out their territory and their date, all at once.
Another example of courtship behaviors of the arms involves how 
closely a couple will (or will not) place their arms next to one another when they are seated together at a table. There are large numbers of sen-sory receptors in our arms, so arm touching can generate sensuous plea-sure. In fact, even brushing against the hairs on our bare arms or a touch through clothing can stimulate nerve endings. So when we place our arms near someone else’s, the limbic brain is demonstrating overtly that w e ar e so c o mf o rta b l e, p h y s i cal c o n ta ct i s pe rmi s s i b l e . Th e fl i p s i d e o f 

Page 142:
128 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 33:  THE SWAT COMMANDER WHO PUT DOWN HIS ARMS
Years ago, I was involved in planning a SWAT operation that was to take 
place in Lakeland, Florida. As the mission planner was describing the operation order , he seemed to have everything covered. His arms were outstretched over two chairs as he confidently went through the very de-tailed arrest plan. Suddenly someone asked, “What about the Lakeland paramedics, have they been contacted?” Instantly the mission planner 
withdrew his arms and dropped them between his knees, palms together. This was a significant change in territorial behavior. He went from domi-nating a large space to being as narrow as possible, all because he had not made the necessary arrangements. His confidence level suddenly 
vaporized. This is a striking example of how quickly our behaviors ebb and flow depending on our mood, level of confidence, or thoughts. These nonverbals occur in real time and immediately transmit data. When we are confident we spread out, when we are less confident we withdraw.
this beha vior is that w e will remo v e our arms from the vicinity of our 
companion’s arms when the relationship is changing for the worse or w h e n  t h e  i n d i v i d u a l  w i t h  w h o m  w e  a r e  s e a t e d  ( w h e t h e r  a  d a t e  o r  a  stranger) is making us feel uncomfortable.
Adornments and Artifacts on the Arms
Around the globe, wealth is often demonstrated through the wearing of 
precious items or adornments on the arms. In many parts of the Middle East, it is still common for women to wear their wealth in the form of gold rings or bands on their arms, indicating relative worth and status. Men, too, will wear expensive watches to demonstrate their socioeco-nomic status or level of wealth. In the 1980s, men in Miami were fanati-cal about wearing Rolex watches; they were the status symbol du jour and were ubiquitous among drug traffickers and nouveau riche alike.

Page 143:
KNOWLEDGE WITHIN REACH  129
Other social emblems, including manifestations of one’s personal or 
career history, can also be displayed in various ways on our arms. People who work in construction, athletes, and soldiers will sometimes reveal the scars of their profession. Uniforms may carry patches on the upper arms. Like the torso, the arms can be billboards to advertise aspects of our personality. Just look at the variety of tattoos people have embla-zoned on their arms or the muscles that bodybuilders proudly display with tight-fitting tank tops.
T o the skilled observer, a careful scrutiny of people’s arms can some-
times reveal information about their lifestyles. The smooth, well-mani-cured elbows of the pampered differ greatly from those who are scarred or tanned from daily outdoor work. People who have been in the mili-tary or in prison may have artifacts of their experiences on their arms, including scars and tattoos. Individuals who espouse hatred toward a certain group or subject will often script or tattoo evidence of that hatred on their arms. Those who use intravenous drugs may have track lines along the veins of their arms. Troubled individuals with a psychological disorder known as borderline personality  may have cuts and slashes where 
they have done intentional injury to their arms (American Psychological Association, 2000, 706–707).
With specific regard to tattoos, this style of body adornment has in-
creased in the last fifteen years, particularly in more “modernized” coun-tries. However, this method of personal decoration has been used around the world for at least thirteen thousand years. As part of our “body bill-board,” the message tattoos convey in current culture should be dis-cussed. Concurrent with the relatively recent increase in tattooing, I was involved in surveying potential jurors, specifically with regard to how a witness or a defendant would be perceived if he had tattoos. The surveys, conducted multiple times with multiple groups of men and women, con-cluded that tattoos were perceived by jurors as being low-status (low-c l a s s )  a d o r n m e n t s  a n d / o r  v e s t i g e s  o f  y o u t h f u l  i n d i s c r e t i o n ,  w h i c h ,  i n  general, were not very well liked.
I tell students that if they have tattoos, they should hide them, espe-
cially when applying for a job—and particularly if going to work in the 

Page 144:
130 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
food industry or the medical profession. Celebrities may be able to get 
away with tattoos, but even they have them masked when working. The bottom line on the subject of tattoos is that surveys show most people don’t like to see them. While that may change one day, for now, if you are trying to influence others in a positive way, you should conceal them.
Arms as Conduits of Affection
Children need to be lovingly touched so that they can grow up feeling 
safe and nurtured, but even adults can use a good hug every once in a while. I give hugs freely because they transmit caring and affection so much more effectively than mere words. I feel sorry for those who are not huggers; they are missing so much in their lives.
As powerful and effective as a hug can be in gaining favor and 
achieving interpersonal effectiveness with others, however, it can also be seen by some as an unwanted intrusion of their personal space. In the li-tigious age in which we live—where a well-meaning hug can be miscon-strued as a sexual advance—one must be careful not to give out hugs where they are unwelcome. As always, careful observation and interpre-ta ti o n o f peo p l e ’ s beha v i o r as y o u in t e r a ct wi th th em will be y o ur bes t indicator as to whether a hug is appropriate or inappropriate in any given circumstance.
Nevertheless, even without giving a hug, people can use their arms to 
demonstrate warmth and, in so doing, increase their chances of being viewed favorably by others. When approaching a stranger for the first time, try demonstrating warmth by leaving your arms relaxed, preferably with the ventral side exposed and perhaps even with the palms of your hands clearly visible. This is a very powerful way of sending the message, “Hello, I mean no harm” to the other person’s limbic system. It is a great way of putting the other person at ease and facilitating any interaction that follows.
In Latin America, an abrazo  (a brief hug) is part of the culture among 

Page 145:
KNOWLEDGE WITHIN REACH  131
males. It is a way of saying, “I like you.” In performing an abrazo, the 
chests come together and the arms engulf the back of the other person. Unfortunately, I know a lot of people who are reluctant to do this and/or feel very awkward when they do. I have seen American businessmen in Latin America who will either refuse to give an abrazo or when they do it, appear as though they’re dancing with their grandmother. My advice is to do it and get it right, since little courtesies mean a lot in any culture. Lea r n in g a p r o pe r a b r a z o i s n o d i f f e r e n t th an l ea r n in g t o s h ak e h an d s correctly and feeling comfortable doing it. If you are a businessman and will be working in Latin America, you will be perceived as cold or aloof if you fail to learn this familiar greeting. There’s no need for that when a simple gesture can engender so much good will and make you simpatico (see box 34).BOX 34:  DON’T GET BUGGED IF YOU GET HUGGED
Years ago at an espionage trial in Tampa, Florida, the defense attorney 
put me on the stand and, wishing to embarrass or discredit me, asked somewhat sarcastically, “Mr. Navarro, isn’t it true that you used to hug my client, the defendant, every time you met with him?” I then replied, “It wasn’t a hug, counselor, it was an abrazo, and there is a difference.” I paused dramatically for a second and then continued, “It was also an op-
portunity for me to see if your client was armed, since he once robbed a bank.” The startled defense attorney ended the provocative line of inquiry then and there, since he was not aware that his client had previously committed a bank robbery with a gun.
Interestingly, this abrazo story made the papers as though the people 
of Tampa and nearby Ybor City (settled by Latinos) had never heard of an abrazo. Since this trial, the attorney in question and I have become close friends and he is now a federal judge. After nearly twenty years, we still laugh about the “abrazo incident.”

Page 146:
132 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
SOME CONCLUDING REMARKS ABOUT 
NONVERBALS OF THE ARMS
Our arms can transmit a lot of information in decoding the intentions 
and sentiments of others. From my perspective, one of the best ways to establish rapport with someone is to touch that person on the arm, some-where between the elbow and the shoulder. Of course, it is always wise to assess the person’s personal and cultural preferences before you proceed. Generally, however, the brief touch I have just described is usually a good and safe place to initiate human contact and to let others know you are getting along. In the Mediterranean, South American, and Arab worlds, touching is an important component of communication and social har-mony. Don’t be shocked, startled, or threatened as you travel if people touch you on the arm (assuming they do so appropriately, as I have de-scribed). It’s their powerful way of saying, “We are OK.” In fact, since human touch is so intimately involved in communication, when there is no touching between people, you should be concerned and wonder why.

Page 147:
SIX
Getting a Grip
Nonverbals of the Hands and Fingers
Among all species, our human hands are unique—not only in what 
they can accomplish, but also in how they communicate. Human 
hands can paint the Sistine Chapel, pluck a guitar, maneuver sur-
gical instruments, chisel a David, forge steel, and write poetry. They can 
grasp, scratch, poke, punch, feel, sense, evaluate, hold, and mold the world 
around us. Our hands are extremely expressive; they can sign for the deaf, 
help tell a story, or reveal our innermost thoughts. No other species has 
appendages with such a remarkable range of capabilities.
Because our hands can execute very delicate movements, they can 
reflect very subtle nuances within the brain. An understanding of hand 
behavior is crucial to decoding nonverbal behaviors, for there is practi-
cally nothing your hands do that is not directed—either consciously or 
subconsciously—by your brain. Despite the acquisition of spoken lan-
guage over millions of years of human evolution, our brains are still 

Page 148:
134 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
hardwired to engage our hands in accurately communicating our emo-
tions, thoughts, and sentiments. Therefore, whether people are speak-ing or not, hand gestures merit our attention as a rich source of nonverbal behavior to help us understand the thoughts and feelings of others.
HOW APPEARANCE AND NONVERBALS OF THE 
HANDS AFFECT INTERPERSONAL PERCEPTION
Not only do others’ hands communicate important information to us, but 
our own hand movements influence how others perceive us. Therefore, the way we use our hands—as well as what we learn from the hand behaviors of others—contribute to our overall interpersonal effectiveness. Let’s start by examining how our hand actions affect what others think of us.
Effective Hand Movements Enhance Our 
Credibility and Persuasiveness
The human brain is programmed to sense the slightest hand and finger 
movement. In fact, our brains give a disproportionate amount of atten-tion to the wrists, palms, fingers, and hands, as compared to the rest of the body (Givens, 2005, 31, 76; Ratey, 2001, 162–165). From an evolution-ary standpoint, this makes sense. As our species adopted an upright pos-ture and our human brain grew ever larger, our hands became more s kill ed, m o r e e x p r es s i v e, an d al so m o r e dan g e r o us. W e ha v e a s urv i v al need to assess each other’s hands quickly to see what they are saying or if they portend ill (as in holding a weapon). Because our brains have a natu-ral bias to focus on the hands, successful entertainers, magicians, and great speakers have capitalized on this phenomenon to make their pre-sentations more exciting or to distract us (see box 35).
People respond positively to effective hand movements. If you wish 
to enhance your effectiveness as a persuasive speaker—at home, at work, e v e n  w i th  f r i e n d s—a t t e m p t  t o  b e c o m e  m o r e  e x p r e s s i v e  i n  y o u r  u s e  o f  

Page 149:
GETTING A GRIP  135
hand movements. For some individuals, effective hand communication 
comes naturally; it is a gift that takes no real thought or education. For others, however, it takes concentrated effort and training. Whether you naturally speak with your hands or not, recognize that we communicate our ideas more effectively when we employ our hands.
Hiding Your Hands Creates a Negative Impression: 
Keep Them Visible
People may regard you with suspicion if they can’t see your hands while 
you are talking. Therefore, always be sure to keep your hands visible dur -ing face-to-face communication with others. If you’ve ever talked to some-one whose hands are underneath a table, I think you will quickly sense how uncomfortable the conversation feels (see box 36). When we interact in person with other individuals, we expect to see their hands, because the brain depends on them as an integral part of the communication process. BOX 35:  KEEPING SUCCESS WELL IN HAND
Most successful speakers use very powerful hand gestures. Unfortu-
nately, one of the best examples I can offer of an individual who devel-oped his hand gestures to improve his communication skills is that of Adolf Hitler. A mere private in the First World War, a painter of greeting cards, and slight of stature, Hitler had no prequalifications or stage pres-ence that would normally be associated with a gifted, credible orator. On 
his own, Hitler began to practice speaking in front of mirrors. Later , he filmed himself while practicing hand gestures to better hone a dramatic style of speaking. The rest is history. An evil human being was able to rise to prominence as leader of the Third Reich through his use of rhetorical 
skills. Some of the movies of Hitler practicing his hand gestures still exist in the archives. They attest to his development as a speaker who capital-ized on using his hands to enthrall and control his audience.

Page 150:
136 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
When the hands are out of sight or less expressive, it detracts from the per-
ceived quality and honesty of the information being transmitted.
The Power of a Handshake
A handshake is usually the first—and possibly only—physical contact we 
have with another person. How we do it, including its strength and how long it is maintained, can affect how we are perceived by the person we are greeting. We can all remember someone who shook our hand and left us feeling uncomfortable about them or about the situation. Don’t dismiss the power of a handshake to leave an impression. It is very significant.BOX 36:  AN UNDERHANDED EXPERIMENT
Years ago I conducted an informal study in three of my classes. I asked 
students to interview each other, instructing half of the class to keep their hands under their desks during the conversation, while the other half was told to leave their hands visible. After a fifteen-minute interview, we dis-covered that the people with their hands under the desk were generally perceived as being uncomfortable, withdrawn (holding back), sneaky, or 
even deceptive by those with whom they were speaking. Those interview-ers with their hands in plain view on top of the desk were perceived as being more open and friendly, and none  was perceived as deceptive. Not 
a very scientific experiment, but quite instructive.
When conducting jury surveys, one thing that stands out is how much 
jurors dislike it when attorneys hide behind the lectern. Jurors want to see the attorney’s hands so they can gauge the presentation more accurately. Jurors also don’t like it when witnesses hide their hands; they perceive this negatively, commenting that the witness must be holding back, or perhaps even lying. While these behaviors have nothing to do with decep-tion per se, the perception of the jurors is significant, reminding us that concealment of the hands should be avoided.

Page 151:
GETTING A GRIP  137
Around the world, it is common to use the hands to greet others, al-
though culture dictates variations on how hand greetings are performed, for how long, and how strong. When I first moved to Utah to attend Brigham Young University, I was introduced to what fellow BYU stu-dents called the “Mormon handshake.” This is a very strong and lengthy handshake used extensively not only by the university students, but also b y  m e m b e r s  o f  t h e  C h u r c h  o f  J e s u s  C h r i s t  o f  L a t t e r - d a y  S a i n t s  ( M o r -mons). Over the years that I was there, I noticed how foreign students, in particular, were often taken aback by this rather overzealous handshake, because in many cultures, especially in Latin America, the handshake is mild (some preferring to give an abrazo, as previously mentioned).
Since handshaking is usually the first time that two people actually 
touch, it can be a defining moment in their relationship. In addition to be-ing used to meet and greet, certain people use it to establish dominance. In the 1980s, much was written about how you could use the handshake to establish control and dominance by maneuvering the hand this way and that way, making sure yours was always on top. What a waste of energy!
I don’t recommend hand jousting to create dominance, as our inten-
tions should be to leave positive impressions when we meet others, not negative ones. If you feel the need to establish dominance, the hands are not the right way to do so. There are other more powerful tactics, includ-ing violation of space and eye-gaze behavior, that are more subtle.
I have shaken hands with people who try to establish dominance through 
this greeting, and I have always come away with negative feelings. They d i d n ’ t  s u c c e e d  i n  m a k i n g  m e  f e e l  i n f e r i o r ,  j u s t  u n c o m f o r ta b l e .  T h e r e  a r e also those who insist on touching the inside (ventral) side of your wrist with their index finger when they shake hands. If it is done to you and you feel uncomfortable, don’t feel surprised, because most people react that way.
Similarly, you will typically feel uncomfortable if someone gives you 
what is referred to as a “politician’s handshake,” in which the other party covers the top of the handshake with his left hand. I suppose politicians think they are being friendlier with this two-handed gesture, not realizing that many people don’t like being touched that way. I know people (mostly men) who insist on shaking hands this way and end up creating negative 

Page 152:
138 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
feelings in the people they meet. Obviously, you should avoid giving any of 
these discomforting handshakes unless you want to alienate someone.
As foreign as it may seem to Westerners, in many cultures men en-
gage in hand-holding behavior. This is very common in the Muslim world as well as in Asia, especially in Vietnam and Laos. Men in the United States often are uncomfortable holding hands with each other because this is not common to our culture beyond childhood or perhaps in certain religious rituals. When I teach at the FBI Academy, I ask the young agents to stand and shake hands with each other. They don’t have a problem doing so, even when asked to engage in a prolonged hand-shake. However, when I ask them to hold hands together side-by-side, sneers and objections quickly arise; they cringe at the thought, and only do so with much hesitation. Then I remind the new agents that we deal with people from many cultures and these individuals often show their comfort level with us by holding our hands. It is something we, as Amer-icans, need to learn to accept, especially when dealing with human assets (informants) from other countries (see box 37).
Many cultures use touch to cement positive sentiments between men, 
something that is not widespread in the United States. The story of the Bulgarian gentleman not only reveals cultural differences but also illus-trates the importance of physical contact for our species. In interpersonal relationships—whether between men, women, parents and children, or lovers—it is critical to have physical contact and to assess it to determine how the relationship stands. One of the signs that a relationship has soured or is compromised is a sudden decrease in the amount of touching (assuming it existed). In any relationship, when there is trust there is more tactile activity.
If you currently travel abroad, or plan to in the future, make sure you 
understand the cultural conventions of the country that you are visiting, particularly with regard to greetings. If someone gives you a weak hand-shake, don’t grimace. If anyone takes your arm, don’t wince. If you are in the Middle East and a person wants to hold your hand, hold it. If you are a man visiting Russia, don’t be surprised when your male host kisses your cheek, rather than shakes your hand. All of these greetings are as natural a 

Page 153:
GETTING A GRIP  139
BOX 37:  WHEN CUSTOMS AND INTELLIGENCE 
GATHERING GO HAND IN HAND
When I was assigned to the Manhattan office of the FBI, I worked with an 
informant (asset) who had defected from Bulgaria. He was an older gen-tleman, and as time went on we became friends. I remember being at his home one afternoon, having tea, which he favored late in the day. We sat on the couch, and as he told me stories of his work and life behind the iron curtain, he took my left hand and just held it, for practically a half hour. As he spoke of his life under Soviet oppression, I could tell this en-counter was more about therapy than it was about work. It was clear that this gentleman took great delight and derived much comfort from holding the hand of another person. This behavior was a sign of his trust in me as we spoke; it was much more than a routine FBI debriefing of a former in-telligence officer. My acceptance of his hand was highly conducive to his coming forth with additional and vital information. I always wonder how much less information I would have received if I had moved my hand because I feared touching or holding another man’s hand.
way to express genuine sentiments as an American handshake. I am hon-
ored when an Arab or Asian man offers to take my hand because I know that it’s a sign of high respect and trust. Accepting these cultural differ-ences is the first step to better understanding and embracing diversity.
Avoid Using Hand Gestures that Offend Others
I n m an y c o un tr i e s th r o u g h o u t th e w o r l d , fin g e r po in tin g i s v i e w e d a s 
one of the most offensive gestures a person can display. Studies show that people don’t like it when someone points a finger at them (see figure 46). In schools as well as prison yards, finger pointing is often the precursor to many fights. When talking with their children, parents should be careful to avoid pointing at them while saying things like “I know you 

Page 154:
140 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
did it.” The finger pointing is so distasteful that it may actually divert the 
child’s attention from what is being said as they process the hostile mes-sage of the gesture (see box 38).
F i n g e r  p o i n t i n g  i s  j u s t  o n e  o f  m a n y  o f f e n s i v e  g e s t u r e s  a  p e r s o n  c a n 
make with the hand or fingers. Obviously, some are so well known they need no further comment, such as “the bird.” Snapping your fingers at someone is also considered rude; you should never attempt to get some-one’s attention with the same gesture you may use to call your dog. In the Michael Jackson trial in 2005, the jurors did not appreciate the mother of one of the victims snapping her fingers at the jury; this had a very nega-tive effect. For those of you interested in further readings on hand ges-tures around the world, I would highly recommend Bodytalk: The Meaning 
of Human Gestures,  by Desmond Morris, and Gestures: The Do’s and Ta-
boos of Body Language Around the W orld,  by Roger E. Axtell. These two 
wonderful books will open your eyes to the diversity of gestures around the world and the eloquence of the hands in expressing human emotions.Perhaps one of the most offensive gestures we 
possess is finger pointing. It has negative connota-tions around the globe.
Fig. 46

Page 155:
GETTING A GRIP  141
BOX 38:  I DON’T GET YOUR POINT
Research with focus groups has shown that a prosecuting attorney needs 
to be very careful when pointing at the defendant with the index finger during opening statements. Jurors don’t like to see such behavior be-cause, in their view, the prosecutor has not earned the right to point until he or she has proven the case. It is far better to gesture with an open hand (palm up) at the defendant than with a finger. Once the case is 
proven, the prosecutor can then point at the defendant with the index finger during closing arguments. This may seem trivial. However, dozens of surveys with mock jurors have shown they are sticklers on this point. So I simply tell attorneys not to engage in finger pointing in the courtroom. 
As for the rest of us, we should not point fingers when dealing with our spouses or children, nor with our colleagues at work. Pointing is just plain offensive.
Be Cautious When Using Preening Behaviors 
Involving the Hands
We use our fingers to preen our clothing, hair, and body when we are 
concerned with how we look. During courtship, humans engage in in-creased amounts of preening—not only with regard to our own appear-ance, but we also groom our mates. Intimacy permits the lover to gently remove a spot of lint from her male counterpart’s sleeve even as he may gently dab a spot of food from the corner of her mouth. These behaviors are also seen between mother and child—not only in humans, but also in other mammals and in birds—and are indicative of caring and close in-timacy. When observed within a relationship, the amount of grooming between the partners is a good barometer of their rapport and the level of intimacy permitted.
Preening, however, can also create negative perceptions. For ex-
ample, it is rude and disrespectful for one person to preen herself in a 

Page 156:
142 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
self-attentive, dismissive way, when she is supposed to be listening to 
someone else (see figure 47). In addition, there are some acts of groom-ing that are seen as more socially acceptable in public than others. It is fine to pick a piece of lint off your sweater on the bus, but clipping your fingernails in public is another matter . Further, what is socially acceptable preening in one setting or culture may not be seen as such in another. It is also inappropriate for a person to preen another indi-vidual when they have not reached the level of intimacy to warrant that behavior.
The Physical Appearance of Your Hands
By looking at people’s hands, it is sometimes possible to assess the kind of 
work they do or activities in which they engage. The hands of individuals who perform manual labor will have a certain rough, calloused appear-ance. Scars may indicate working on a farm or athletic wounds received on the playing field. Standing with hands at the side with fingers curled Self-preening is acceptable, but not when others are 
talking to you. This is a sign of dismissiveness.
Fig. 47

Page 157:
GETTING A GRIP  143
may indicate prior military experience. A guitar player may have calluses 
on the tips of the fingers on one hand.
Hands also indicate how much we care for ourselves and how we view 
social con v ention. Hands ma y be tended to or they ma y be fil th y . Nails may be manicured or look ratty. Long nails on men are seen as odd or effeminate, and people typically interpret nail-biting as a sign of nervous-ness or insecurity (see figure 48). Because our brains focus so much on the hands, you should pay extra attention to hand hygiene, since others will.
Learn How to Manage Sweaty Hands
No one really enjoys shaking a hand that is moist, so I advise people who 
develop sweaty hands when meeting others (particularly important people like potential employers, future in-laws, or individuals in a position to grant favors) to dry off their hands before they attempt a handshake. Hand sweating not only occurs when we are excessively warm, it also happens when we are nervous or under stress. When you make contact 
Nail-biting is generally perceived as a sign of 
insecurity or nervousness.
Fig. 48

Page 158:
144 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
with someone who has sweaty hands, you can assume he or she is under 
stress (since limbic arousal causes sweating). Use this opportunity to win some interpersonal points by unobtrusively doing what you can to help the person calm down. Putting people at ease when they are stressed is one of the best ways to insure more honest, effective, and successful interactions.
There are people who erroneously believe that if you have sweaty 
palms, you must be lying. This is simply not accurate. The same part of the nervous system that is activated during the limbic freeze, flight, or fight response (the sympathetic nervous system) also governs our sweat glands. Since something as simple as meeting someone new can cause sweaty hands, this phenomenon must not  be construed as indicative of 
deception. Approximately 5 percent of the population sweats profusely, and chronic perspiration makes the palms uncomfortably sweaty (a con-dition known as hyperhidrosis) (Collett, 2003, 11). Sweaty palms are not indicative of deception. They are only indicative of stress or, in some cases, a genetic disorder. Be careful when evaluating the reasons for moist hands. Although some sources state that a person is lying if his palms are sweaty, this is simply not true.
READING NONVERBALS OF THE HANDS
Up to this point, we have been examining how our hand behaviors and appearance can influence the way others perceive us. Now let’s examine some nonverbals of the hands that will help us read what other people are thinking and feeling. I’ll start with a few general comments about how our hands reveal information and then turn to some specific hand behaviors of high and low confidence that can be useful in understand-ing the people we encounter.
Nervousness in the Hands Sends an Important Message
The muscles that control our hands and fingers are designed for pre-
cise and fine movements. When the limbic brain is aroused and we are 

Page 159:
GETTING A GRIP  145
stressed and nervous, surges of neurotransmitters and hormones such as 
adrenalin (epinephrine) cause uncontrollable quivering of the hands. Our hands will also shake when we hear, see, or think of something that has negative consequences. Any objects held in the hands may appear to magnify this trembling, telegraphing a message that says, “I am under stress” (see box 39). This shaking behavior is particularly noticeable when a person is holding an elongated object such as a pencil or a cigarette, or something relatively large but lightweight like a piece of paper. The ob-ject will begin to shake or quiver immediately following the statement or event that created the stressful circumstances.
Positive emotions can also cause our hands to shake, whether we’re 
holding a winning lottery ticket or a winning hand in poker. When we are genuinely excited, our hands will quiver, sometimes uncontrollably. These are limbic-driven reactions. At an airport, as parents, spouses, and other family members excitedly wait for their returning soldier or rela-tive, their hands will often shake in excitement. They may restrain their hands by grabbing and holding someone else’s hand, or by tucking their hands in their underarms or clasping them and holding them at chest level. Old videos of the Beatles’ first visit to America are replete with young girls clasping their hands to combat the shaking that accompanied their extreme excitement.
Obviously, you must first determine whether shaky hands are due to 
fear or joy by putting the behavior in context —examining the circum-
stances in which it occurred. If the shaky hands are accompanied by pacifying actions, like touching the neck or pressing the lips together, I’d be more likely to suspect that the shaking was related to stress (some-thing negative) rather than something positive.
It should be noted that trembling hands are only relevant as a nonver-
bal communication when they represent a change from someone’s nor-mal hand movements. If a person’s hands always shake because, for example, he is a heavy coffee drinker or is drug or alcohol addicted, the tremor, while informative, becomes part of that individual’s baseline in terms of nonverbal behavior. Likewise in people with certain neurologi-cal disorders (e.g., Parkinson’s disease), hand tremor may not indicate 

Page 160:
146 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 39:  WHERE THERE’S (JITTERY) SMOKE, THERE’S FIRE
During my work on a major espionage investigation, I was interviewing a 
man of interest in the case. As I watched him, he lit a cigarette and began smoking. I had no real clues with regard to his possible connection to the case; there were no witnesses to the crime, no significant leads, and only vague ideas of who might be involved. During the interview I brought up many names of people who were of interest to the FBI and the army in 
this matter. Whenever I mentioned the name of one particular individual named Conrad, the man’s cigarette shook in his hand like the needle on a polygraph machine. To see if this was a random event or something more significant, I mentioned additional names to test his reactions; there were 
none. Yet, on four separate occasions, when I mentioned Conrad, the subject’s cigarette repeatedly shook. For me that was enough to verify there was more to the relationship between the interviewee and Con-rad than we knew. The shaking of the cigarette was a limbic reaction to a threat. It was also an indication to me that this individual felt somehow endangered by the revelation of that name; therefore he likely either had knowledge of something nefarious or was directly involved in the crime.
During that initial interview with the subject, I did not know whether or 
not he was actually involved in the crime because, frankly, I did not know enough about the case. The only thing that spurred us to pursue the in-vestigation and additional interviews was the fact that he had reacted to one name with the “shaky hand” response. Perhaps but for that one be-havior, he would have escaped justice. In the end, after many voluntary interviews over a year, he admitted his involvement with Conrad in espio-nage activities and eventually gave a full confession of his crimes.
their emotional state. In fact, if such a person suddenly ceases to tremble 
for a moment, it may indicate a deliberate attempt to focus more deeply on the particular subject just mentioned (Murray, 2007). Remember, it is change  in behavior that is most significant.

Page 161:
GETTING A GRIP  147
As a general guideline, any shaking behavior that starts or stops sud-
denly, or is somehow markedly different from baseline behavior, deserves further scrutiny. Considering the context in which the shaking occurs, when it occurs, and any other tells that might support a specific interpre-tation will improve your ability to read a person correctly.
HAND DISPLAYS OF HIGH CONFIDENCE
A high-confidence display reflects a high degree of brain comfort and self-assurance. Several confidence demonstrations associated with the hands alert us that the person feels good about, and comfortable with, his current state of affairs.
Steepling
Hand steepling  may well be the most powerful high-confidence tell (see 
figure 49). It involves touching the spread fingertips of both hands, in a gesture similar to “praying hands,” but the fingers are not interlocked 
and the palms may not be touching. It is called steepling because the hands look like the pointed top of a church steeple. In the United States, women tend to steeple low (perhaps at the waist), which some-times makes the behavior more difficult to observe. Men tend to steeple higher, at chest level, which makes their steepling more visible and powerful.
Steepling signifies that you are confident of your thoughts or posi-
tion. It lets others know precisely how you feel about something and how dedicated you are to your point of view (see box 40). High-status people (lawyers, judges, medical doctors) often use steepling as part of their daily behavioral repertoire because of their confidence in them-selves and their status. All of us have steepled at one time or another, but we do so to varying degrees and using a variety of styles. Some do it all the time; some rarely do it; others perform modified steeples (such as with only the extended index finger and thumb touching each 

Page 162:
148 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
other while remaining fingers are interlaced). Some steeple under the 
table; others do it high in front of them; some even steeple above their heads.
In people who are unaware of the powerful nonverbal meaning of 
steepling, the response can persist for significant periods of time, particu-larly if circumstances stay positive for them. Even when people are aware that steepling is a tell, they still have difficulty concealing it. In these indi-v i d u a l s ,  t h e  l i m b i c  b r a i n  h a s  m a d e  i t  s u c h  a n  a u t o m a t i c  r e s p o n s e  t h a t  steepling displays are difficult to overcome, because particularly when an individual is excited, he or she forgets to monitor and control the reaction.
Circumstances can change quickly and alter our reactions to things 
and people. When this happens, we can transition from a high-confi-dence steepling display to a low-confidence hand gesture in milliseconds. When our confidence is shaken or doubt has entered our minds, our steepled fingers may interlace as in prayer (see figure 50). These changes Steepling of hands, fingertip to fingertip, is one of the 
most powerful displays of confidence we possess.
Fig. 49

Page 163:
GETTING A GRIP  149
in nonverbal behavior happen quickly and very accurately reflect and 
define our real-time internal reactions to changing events. A person can go from steepling (high confidence) to fingers interlaced (low confidence) and back to steepling (high confidence)—reflecting the ebb and flow of assurance and doubt.
You, too, can harness proper steepling and hand placement for posi-
tive impact. Steepling can be such a powerful purveyor of confidence and self-assurance that it is hard to challenge a person displaying such a non-verbal signal. Steepling is a very useful behavior to adopt; speakers and salespeople should use it often for emphasis, as should anyone trying to con v ey an im portant point. Consider the confidence of y our hand ges-tures when you are being interviewed by a prospective employer, present-ing material at a meeting, or simply discussing issues with your friends.
Far too often during professional meetings, I see women steepling 
under the table or very low, undermining the confidence they genuinely Hand-wringing is a universal way of showing we are 
stressed or concerned.
Fig. 50

Page 164:
150 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
possess. I hope that as they recognize the power of the steeple as an in-
dicator of self-assurance, competence, and confidence—traits most indi-viduals would want to be recognized as possessing—more women will embrace this gesture and display it above the table.
THUMB DISPLAYS
It is interesting how verbal language sometimes mirrors nonverbal lan-
guage. When movie critics give a film two thumbs up, it indicates their BOX 40:  WHEN IT COMES TO STEEPLING, 
THE JURY ISN’T  OUT
The power of nonverbal behavior can be documented by studying the 
impact of steepling in various social settings. Steepling is useful, for ex-ample, when testifying in court; its use is advocated when training expert witnesses. Witnesses should steeple to emphasize a point or to indicate their high confidence in what they are saying. In doing so, their testimony will be perceived more powerfully by the jury than if they were merely to place their hands on their laps or interlace their fingers. Interestingly, when a prosecutor steeples as his witness testifies, the value of the testi-mony is enhanced because the attorney is perceived as being confident of the witness’s statements. When jurors see witnesses who interlace their fingers or wring their hands, they tend to associate such behavior with nervousness or too often, unfortunately, with deception. It is impor-tant to note that both honest and dishonest individuals display these be-haviors, and they should not be automatically associated with lying. It is recommended that when testifying, individuals should either steeple or cup their hands together without interlacing their fingers, as these are gestures that are perceived as being more authoritative, more confident, and more genuine.

Page 165:
GETTING A GRIP  151
confidence in its quality. Thumbs up  is almost always a nonverbal sign of 
high confidence. Interestingly , it is also associated with high status. Look at photographs of John F. Kennedy and notice how often he carried his hands in his coat pocket, thumbs sticking out (see figure 51). His brother Bobby did the same thing. Lawyers, college professors, and doctors are of-ten seen grasping their lapels simultaneously with their thumbs up in the air. There is a national chain of fashion/portrait studios that invariably has females photographed with at least one hand clutching their collar with a thumb in the air. Apparently the marketing team at this company also recognizes that thumbs up is a high-confidence or high-status display.Often seen with high-status individuals, 
the thumb sticking out of the pocket is a high-confidence display.
Fig. 51

Page 166:
152 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
High-Confidence, High-Status Thumb Displays
When individuals carry their thumbs high, it is a sign that they think 
highly of themselves and/or are confident in their thoughts or present circumstances (see figures 52 and 53). Thumbs up is another example of a gravity-defying gesture, a type of nonverbal behavior normally associ-ated with comfort and high confidence. Normally, the interlacing of the fingers is a low-confidence gesture, except when the thumbs are ex-tended straight up. It has been noted that people who use thumb displays generally tend to be more aware of their environment, more acute in their thinking, and sharper in their observations. Observe those individ-uals who manifest thumbs-up behavior and notice how they fit this pro-file. Normally, people don’t posture with their thumbs up, so when they do, you can be relatively certain that this is a significant behavior indica-tive of positive feelings.
Thumbs up is usually a good indication 
of positive thoughts. This can be very fluid during a conversation.The thumbs can suddenly disappear, 
as in this photo, when there is less emphasis or emotions turn negative.
Fig. 52
 Fig. 53

Page 167:
GETTING A GRIP  153
Low-Confidence, Low-Status Thumb Displays
Feelings of low confidence can be evidenced when a person (usually a 
male) puts his thumbs in his pocket and lets the fingers hang out on the s i d e  ( s e e  fi g u r e  5 4 ) .  P a r t i c u l a r l y  i n  a n  e m p l o y m e n t  s e t t i n g ,  t h i s  s i g n a l  says, “I am very unsure of myself.” People who are leaders or who are otherwise in control don’t manifest this behavior when they are working or performing. A high-status individual who is casually relaxing may exhibit this behavior briefly, but never while he is “on.” This is nearly always a low-confidence or low-status display.
Thumb displays are so accurate that they can help you effectively 
assess who is feeling good about himself and who is struggling. I have seen men make a potent presentation punctuated by steepling, but when a listener revealed an error in the speech, the thumbs went into 
Thumbs in the pocket indicate low status and 
confidence. People in authority should avoid this display because it sends the wrong message.
Fig. 54

Page 168:
154 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 41:  THUMB-THING IS WRONG HERE
While I was staying at a world-renowned hotel in Bogotá, Colombia, the 
general manager commented to me that he had recently hired some new hotel guards, and although he couldn’t put his finger on it, there was something about them he didn’t like. He knew that I had worked in law enforcement for the FBI, and he asked whether I noticed anything both-ersome about his new staff members. We walked outside where the guards were posted and took a quick glance. The manager noted that al-though they had new uniforms and their boots were shined, something wasn’t right. I agreed that the uniforms looked professional, but pointed out that the guards were standing with their thumbs in their pockets, making them look weak and incompetent. At first the manager didn’t seem to grasp what I was saying until I had him demonstrate the posture himself. Immediately he said, “You are right. They look like little kids wait-ing for their mother to tell them what to do.” The next day the guards were shown how to stand and look authoritative (hands behind back, chin up) without looking menacing to the guests. Sometimes little things mean a lot. In this case, the disappearing thumbs became powerful purveyors of low confidence—not exactly what you want from a security force, espe-cially in Bogotá, Colombia.
Try this experiment on your own. Stand with your thumbs in your 
pockets and ask people what they think of you. Their comments will con-firm the unflattering and weak attitude this posture projects. You will never see a presidential candidate or a leader of a country with his thumbs in his pockets. This behavior is not seen in confident individuals (see figure 55).their pockets. These types of thumb displays are reminiscent of a child 
standing in front of a disappointed mother. This behavior conveys that someone has transitioned from high confidence to low confidence very quickly (see box 41).

Page 169:
GETTING A GRIP  155
Genital Framing
Men sometimes, subconsciously, will hook their thumbs inside their 
waistbands on either side of the zipper and either pull up their pants or even let their thumbs hang there, as their dangling fingers frame their genitals (see figure 56). Genital framing  is a powerful dominance display. 
In essence, it is saying, “Check me out, I am a virile male.”
Not long after starting to write this book, I discussed this nonver-
bal behavior when teaching a class at the FBI in Quantico, Virginia. The students scoffed, saying that no man, especially subconsciously , Often used as a sign of insecurity or social 
discomfort, thumbs in the pocket transmit this message readily and thus should be avoided.
Fig. 55

Page 170:
156 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
would be that blatant about his sexuality. The very next day, one of 
the students came back and told the class that he had observed a stu-dent in the bathroom who stood in front of the mirror, preened him-self, put on his sunglasses, and just for a moment did some genital framing before he proudly exited the bathroom. I am sure that the guy wasn’t even thinking about what he was doing. But in fact, geni-tal framing occurs more often than we think, and not only in coun-try western videos! Remember the Fonz in the TV series Happy 
Days ?Using the hands to frame the genitals is often 
seen with young males and females during the courtship years. It is a dominance display.
Fig. 56

Page 171:
GETTING A GRIP  157
HAND DISPLAYS OF LOW CONFIDENCE OR STRESS
L o w - c o n f i d e n c e  d i s p l a y s  a r e  t h e  f l i p  s i d e  o f  t h e i r  h i g h - c o n f i d e n c e  
counterparts. They reflect brain discomfort, insecurity, and self-doubt. Low -confidence displays should alert us that the individual is experi-encing negati v e emotions that ma y be ca used by being in an uncom-f o r t a b l e  s i t u a t i o n  o r  b y  t h o u g h t s  t h a t  i n d u c e  s e l f - d o u b t  o r  l i m i t e d  confidence.
Frozen Hands
Research tells us liars tend to gesture less, touch less, and move their 
arms and legs less than honest people (V rij, 2003, 65). This is consistent with limbic reactions. In the face of a threat (in this case having a lie de-tected), we move less or freeze so as not to attract attention. This behavior is often quite observable during conversation because a person’s arms become very restrained while telling a lie and otherwise are animated when telling the truth. Because such changes are controlled by the limbic system rather than the thinking brain, they are more reliable and useful than spoken words; they indicate what is really going on in the mind of the individual who is speaking (see box 42). So look for hand and arm movements that are suddenly restrained; they say a lot about what is go-ing on in that person’s brain.
Hand-wringing
When people wring their hands or interlace their fingers, particularly in 
response to a significant comment, event, or change in their environ-ment, it is normally indicative of stress or low confidence (see figure 50 on page 149). This common pacifier, seen in people around the world, actually makes it look like they are engaged in prayer—and perhaps, subconsciously or otherwise, they are. As the intensity of the hand-wring-ing increases, the color of the fingers may change as areas blanch due to 

Page 172:
158 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
blood being forced away from the tension points. Matters clearly are get-
ting worse as this behavior manifests.
Interlaced Stroking or Rubbing of the Hands
A person who is in doubt (a lesser degree of lowered confidence) or un-
der low stress will only slightly rub the palms of his hands together (see figure 57). However, if the situation becomes more stressful or if his con-fidence level continues to fall, watch how suddenly gentle finger-to-palm stroking transitions to more dramatic rubbing of interlaced fingers (see figure 58). The interlacing of fingers is a very accurate indicator of high distress that I have seen in the most acute of interviews—both in the FBI and in people testifying before Congress. As soon as an extremely deli-cate subject comes up, the fingers straighten and intertwine, as the hands BOX 42:  A LESS THAN MOVING EXPERIENCE
The tendency for liars to be less animated in their gestures was a major 
reason I didn’t believe a young woman who had told local sheriff ’s depu-ties that her six-month-old son had been kidnapped in the parking lot of a Wal-Mart in Tampa, Florida. As the woman told her story, I observed her from a monitoring room. After witnessing her behavior, I told the investi-gators that I didn’t believe the totality of her story; her demeanor was too 
subdued. When people tell the truth, they make every effort to ensure that you understand them. They gesticulate with their arms and face and are emphatically expressive. Not so with this suspect. The retelling of a hor-rific kidnapping story by a loving and distraught mother would have been 
accompanied by more demonstrative, ardent behaviors. Their absence was alerting to us. Eventually the woman confessed that she had actually killed her child by stuffing him in a plastic garbage bag. The kidnapping story was a total fabrication. The freeze response of her limbic system that restrained her movements betrayed the lie.

Page 173:
GETTING A GRIP  159
begin to rub up and down. I speculate that the increased tactile contact 
between the hands provides the brain with more pacifying messages.
Neck Touching
I am discussing neck touching in this chapter on hand behaviors because 
if you keep an eye on the hands, they eventually take you to the neck. People who touch their necks (anywhere) while speaking are, in fact, re-flecting lower-than-normal confidence or are relieving stress. The cover-ing of the neck area, throat, and/or the suprasternal notch during times of stress is a universal and strong indicator that the brain is actively pro-cessing something that is threatening, objectionable, unsettling, ques-tionable, or emotional. It has nothing to do with deception, although deceptive people may demonstrate such behavior if they are troubled. So again, keep your eyes on the hands, and as feelings of discomfort and distress surface in people, their hands will rise to the occasion, and cover or touch their neck.FPO text: #58
We often pacify anxiety or 
nervousness by stroking our fingers across the palm or rubbing our hands together.When the fingers interlace to rub 
up and down, as in this photo, the brain is asking for extra hand contact to pacify more serious concerns or anxiety.
Fig. 57
 Fig. 58

Page 174:
160 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
I can’t tell you how many thousands of times I have seen this behav-
ior, yet most people are unaware of its significance (see box 43). Just re-cently I was chatting with a friend outside a conference room when a female associate walked out with one hand over her neck dimple and the other holding a cell phone. My friend continued to converse as if nothing were wrong. When the woman on the cell phone ended her call, I said, “We’d better go check on her, something’s not right.” Sure enough, one of her kids had come down with a high fever at school and needed to go home as soon as possible. Neck touching is one of those behaviors that is so reliable and accurate that it truly merits our close attention.BOX 43:  UP TO HER NECK IN LIES
Sometimes not covering the neck can be a telltale clue that something is 
amiss. I once assisted a local law enforcement agency with a case involv-ing an alleged rape. The woman who reported this assault had reported three separate rapes in a five-year period, a statistically unlikely history. As I watched her videotaped interview, I noticed that while she spoke of how frightened she was and how terrible she felt, she was extremely pas-
sive and never once covered her suprasternal notch as she told the story. I found her “lack of behavior” suspicious and pointed it out to the investi-gators. The woman simply was not showing typical signs of distress. In fact, I have investigated other rape cases in which women will cover their 
suprasternal notch while recounting the crime even decades after it oc-curred. Upon further investigation, the impassive woman’s case fell apart. In the end, we learned she had fabricated all her allegations—costing the city thousands of dollars—merely because she thrived on the attention given to her by responding officers, investigating detectives, and victim advocates, all of whom initially believed her and wanted to help.

Page 175:
GETTING A GRIP  161
Microexpressions of the Hands
A microgesture  is a very brief nonverbal behavior that occurs when a per-
son is attempting to suppress a normal response to a negative stimulus (Ekman, 2003, 15). In these circumstances, the more reflexive and short-lived the behavior is, the more truthful it tends to be. For instance, let’s imagine the boss tells an employee he has to help out and work this weekend because someone is sick. On hearing the news, the employee’s nose crinkles or a slight smirk appears suddenly but briefly. These mi-crogestures of dislike are very accurate displays of how the person truly feels. Similarly, our hands can display microexpressions that may sur-prise you (see box 44).
CHANGES IN HAND BEHAVIORS CAN REVEAL 
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
As with all nonverbal behaviors, sudden alterations in hand motion sug-
gest an abrupt change in someone’ s thoughts and feelings. When lovers rapidly move their hands away from each other during a meal, it is a sign that something negative has just happened. Hand withdrawal may hap-pen in seconds, but it is a very accurate real-time indicator of the person’s feelings.
Gradual hand withdrawals are also worthy of note. A while ago I was 
invited to dinner by a married couple with whom I had been friends since our college days. We were chatting around the table at the end of the meal when the topic of finances arose. My friends revealed that they were experiencing money problems. As the wife complained about how “the money seemed to just disappear,” likewise, her husband’s hands si-multaneously and gradually disappeared from the tabletop. As she spoke, I watched him slowly withdraw his hands until they rested, finally, on his lap. This sort of distancing is a cue indicati v e of psychological flight  
(part of our limbic survival mechanism) that often occurs when we are 

Page 176:
162 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 44:  THE BIRD AS A WORD
In his remarkable book Telling Lies , Dr. Paul Ekman describes his re-
search using high-speed cameras to reveal microgestures that subcon-sciously communicate an individual’s disfavor or true emotions (Ekman, 1991, 129–131). One such microgesture noted by Dr. Ekman is giving the bird. In a major national security case in which I was personally involved as an observer, a subject repeatedly used his middle (“bird”) finger to 
push his glasses into position whenever the lead Justice Department in-terviewer (whom he despised) asked him questions. This behavior was not observed with other interviewers, but only with the interviewer the subject plainly did not like. At first we did not believe we were seeing such 
an obvious but fleeting gesture that was so clearly limited to a single inter-viewer. Fortunately, the interviews were videotaped as part of a legal prof-fer (i.e., the subject agrees to cooperate in consideration for a lighter sentence), so we could review the tape to confirm what we were seeing.
Perhaps equally interesting, the chief interviewer never saw the “bird” 
behavior and, when told about it, refused to accept that it was indicative of the interviewee’s antipathy. When it was all over, however, the inter-viewee commented harshly on how much he despised the chief inter-viewer, and it was quite evident that he tried to subvert the interview because of this clash of personalities.
Microgestures of the hands come in many forms, including pushing 
the hands downward along the legs and then lifting the bird finger at the moment the palms reach the knees. This has been observed in both men 
and women. Again, these microgestures occur very quickly and can be 
obscured easily by other activities. Watch for these behaviors and do not dismiss them, if observed. At a minimum, microgestures should be exam-ined in context as indicators of enmity, dislike, contempt, or disdain.

Page 177:
GETTING A GRIP  163
threatened. The behavior suggested to me that the husband was conceal-
ing something. As it turned out, he had been pilfering money from the couple’s joint checking account to support a gambling habit, a vice that eventually cost him his marriage. His guilty knowledge of the covert withdrawals explained the reason his hands withdrew from the table. Although the motion was a gradual change, it was sufficient to cause me to suspect that something was wrong.
One of the most important observations you can make in relation to 
the hands is noticing when they go dormant. When the hands stop il-lustrating and emphasizing, it is usually a clue to a change in brain activ-ity (perhaps because of a lack of commitment) and is cause for heightened awareness and assessment. Although, as we’ve noted, hand restriction can signal deception, do not immediately jump to this conclusion. The only inference you can draw at the moment the hands go dormant is that the brain is communicating a different sentiment or thought. The change m a y  s i m p l y  r e fl e c t  l e s s  c o n fi d e n c e  o r  l e s s  a t ta c h m e n t  t o  w h a t  i s  b e i n g  said for a variety of reasons. Remember, any deviation from normal hand behavior—be it an increase, a decrease, or just something unusual—should be considered for its significance.
SOME CONCLUDING REMARKS ABOUT 
NONVERBALS OF THE HANDS AND FINGERS
Most of us spend so much time studying people’ s faces that we under -
utilize the information provided by their hands. The sensitive hands of humans not only feel and sense the world around us, they also reflect our r es ponses to tha t w o r l d. W e si t in fr on t o f a bank er w on dering if our loan will be approved, with our hands in front of us, fingers intertwined (prayerlike), reflecting the tension and nervousness within us. Or, in a business meeting, the hands may assume a steepling position, letting oth-ers know we are confident. Our hands may quiver at the mention of someone who betrayed us in our past. Hands and fingers can provide a 

Page 178:
164 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
great deal of significant information. We just need to observe and decode 
their actions correctly and in context.
You can know how someone feels about you from a single touch. The 
hands are powerful transmitters of our emotional state. Use them in your own nonverbal communications and count on them to provide valuable nonverbal intelligence about others.

Page 179:
SEVEN
The Mind’s Canvas
Nonverbals of the Face
 When it comes to emotions, our faces are the mind’s canvas. 
What we feel is exquisitely communicated through a smile, a 
frown, or immeasurable nuances in between. This is an evolu-
tionary blessing that sets us apart from all other species and makes us the 
most expressive animals on this planet.
Our facial expressions, more than anything else, serve as our universal 
language—our human crosscultural lingua franca—whether here (wher-
e v e r  “ h e r e ”  i s  f o r  y o u )  o r  i n  B o r n e o .  T h i s  i n t e r n a t i o n a l  l a n g u a g e  h a s  
served as a practical means of communication since the dawn of man, to 
facilitate understanding among people lacking a common language.
When observing others, we can quickly recognize when someone ap-
pears surprised, interested, bored, fatigued, anxious, or frustrated. We 
can look at our friends’ faces and see when they are displeased, doubt-
ful, contented, anguished, disappointed, incredulous, or concerned. The 

Page 180:
166 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
expressions of children let us know if they are sad, excited, perplexed, or 
nervous. We were never specifically taught how to generate or translate these facial behaviors, and yet we all know them, perform them, inter-pret them, and communicate through them.
With all the various muscles that precisely control the mouth, lips, eyes, 
nose, forehead, and jaw, human faces are richly endowed to produce an immense variety of expressions. It is estimated that humans are capable of more than ten thousand different facial expressions (Ekman, 2003, 14–15).
This versatility makes nonverbals of the face very effective, extremely 
efficient, and, when not interfered with, quite honest. Happiness, sad-ness, anger, fear, surprise, disgust, joy, rage, shame, anguish, and interest are universally recognized facial expressions (Ekman, 2003, 1–37). Discom-fort—whether on the face of a baby, a child, a teenager, an adult, or the elderly—is recognized around the globe; likewise we can distinguish the expressions that let us know all is well.
While our faces can be very honest in displaying how we feel, they do 
not always necessarily represent our true sentiments. This is because we can, to a degree, control our facial expressions and, thus, put on a false front. From an early age, we are taught by our parents not to make faces when we don’t like the food in front of us, or we are compelled to fake a smile when greeting someone we don’t like. In essence, we are taught to lie with our faces, and so we become quite adept at hiding our true senti-ments facially, even though they occasionally do leak out.
When we lie using our faces, we are often said to be acting; obvi-
ously, world-class actors can adopt any number of faces to create fic-tional feelings on demand. Unfortunately, many people, especially con men and other more serious social predators, can do the same thing. They can put on a false face when they are lying, conniving, or trying to influence the perception of others through false smiles, fake tears, or deceiving looks.
Facial expressions can still provide meaningful insights into what a 
person is thinking and feeling. We simply have to be mindful that these signals can be faked, so the best evidence of true sentiment is derived from clusters of behaviors, including facial and body cues, that buttress 

Page 181:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  167
or complement each other. By assessing facial behaviors in context and 
comparing them to other nonverbal behaviors, we can use them to help reveal what the brain is processing, feeling, and/or intending. Since the brain tends to use everything above the shoulders as a single canvas for expression and communication, we are going to refer to the face and its mantle, the neck, as one: our public face.
NEGATIVE AND POSITIVE EMOTIONAL 
DISPLAYS OF THE FACE
Negative emotions—displeasure, disgust, antipathy, fear, and anger—
m a k e  u s  t e n s e .  T h a t  t e n s i o n  m a n i f e s t s  i n  m a n y  w a y s  i n  a n d  o n  t h e  body. Our faces may show a constellation of tension-revealing cues si-multaneously: tightening of jaw muscles, flaring of nose wings (naral wing dilation), squinting of the eyes, quivering of the mouth, or lip oc-clusion (in which lips seemingly disappear). On closer examination, you might note that eye focus is fixed, the neck is stiff, and head tilt is non-existent. An individual might not say anything about being tense, but if 
these manifestations are present there is no doubt that he is upset and that his brain is processing some negative emotional issue. These nega-tive emotional cues are displayed similarly throughout the world, and there is real value in looking for them.
When someone is upset, either all or only a few of these nonverbal 
behaviors may be present, and they may manifest as mild and fleeting or may be acute and pronounced, lasting for minutes or even longer. Think of Clint Eastwood in the old spaghetti westerns, squinting at his oppo-nents before a gun battle. That look said it all. Of course actors are t r a i n e d  t o  m a k e  th e i r  f a c i a l  e x p r e s s i o n s  p a r t i c u l a r l y  e a s y  t o  r e c o g n i z e .  However, in the real world, these nonverbal cues are sometimes more difficult to spot, either because they are subtle, intentionally obfuscated, or simply overlooked (see figure 59).
Consider, for example, jaw tightening  as an indication of tension. Af-
ter a business meeting, an executive might say to a colleague, “Did you 

Page 182:
168 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
see how tense Bill’s jaw got when I made that proposal?” Only to hear 
his partner respond, “No, I didn’t catch that” (see box 45). We miss facial cues because we have been taught not to stare and/or because we concen-trate more on what  is being said than on how it is being said.
Keep in mind that people often work at hiding their emotions, mak-
ing them more difficult to detect if we are not conscientious observers. In addition, facial cues may be so fleeting—microgestures—that they are difficult to pick up. In a casual conversation, these subtle behaviors may not be of much significance, but in an important interpersonal interac-tion (between lovers, parents and children, business associates, or at an employment interview), such seemingly minor displays of tension may reflect deep emotional conflict. Since our conscious brains may try to mask our limbic emotions, any signals that reach the surface are criti-cal to detect, as they may yield a more accurate picture of a person’s deep-rooted thoughts and intentions.
Although many joyous facial expressions are easily and universally 
recognized, these nonverbal tells may also be suppressed or concealed for Squinting, furrowing of the forehead, and 
facial contortions are indicative of distress or discomfort.
Fig. 59

Page 183:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  169
BOX 45:  MY LIPS SAY I LOVE YOU, BUT MY LOOKS 
SAY OTHERWISE
I am amazed at how many times positive words pour from people’s 
mouths while their faces gives off negative nonverbals that clearly contra-dict what is being said. At a recent party, one of the guests was comment-ing how pleased he was that his kids had good jobs. He said this, with a less-than-generous smile and tight jaw muscles, as those standing around congratulated him. Later, his wife told me privately that her husband was, in fact, extremely upset that the kids were just barely getting by in their meaningless jobs that were going nowhere. His words said one thing, but his face said quite another.
a variety of reasons, making them more difficult to detect. For example, 
we certainly don’t want to show elation when we are dealt a powerful hand of cards in a poker game, or we may not want our colleagues to know we received a larger financial bonus then they did. We learn to try to conceal our happiness and excitement in circumstances where we deem it unwise to reveal our good fortune. Nevertheless, as with nega-tive body cues, subtle or restrained positive nonverbals can be detected through careful observation and assessment of other subtle corroborative behaviors. For instance, our faces may leak a twinge of excitement that by itself, might not be enough to convince an astute observer that we are truly happy. However, our feet might provide additional corroborative evidence of excitement, helping to validate the belief that the positive emotion is genuine (see box 46).
Genuine and unrestrained feelings of happiness are reflected in the 
face and neck. Positive emotions are revealed by the loosening of the fur-rowed lines on the forehead, relaxation of muscles around the mouth, emergence of full lips (they are not compressed or tight lipped), and wid-ening of the eye area as surrounding muscles relax. When we are truly 

Page 184:
170 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 46:  THE FACE AND FEET SHOW LIFE IS SWEET
Not long ago I was waiting for a flight out of Baltimore when the man next 
to me at the ticket counter received the good news that he was being upgraded to first class. As he sat down he tried to suppress a smile, since to gloat over his good fortune would be seen as rude by other passengers waiting for an upgrade. Based on his facial expression alone, to declare he was happy would have been a marginal call. Then, however, I over-
heard him call his wife to tell her the good news, and although he spoke quietly so those seated nearby couldn’t hear the conversation, his feet were bouncing up and down like those of a young child waiting to open his birthday gifts. His happy feet provided collaborative evidence of his 
joyful state. Remember, look for clusters of behavior to solidify your ob-servations.
relaxed and comfortable, facial muscles relax and the head will tilt to the 
side, exposing our most vulnerable area, the neck (see figure 60). This is a high-comfort display—often seen during courtship—that is nearly im-possible to mimic when we are uncomfortable, tense, suspicious, or threatened (see box 47).
INTERPRETING NONVERBAL 
BEHAVIORS OF THE EYES
Our eyes have been called the windows of the soul, so it seems appropri-
ate to examine these two portals for nonverbal messages of emotions or thoughts. Despite music lyrics such as “your lyin’ eyes,” our eyes do ex-press a lot of useful information. In fact, the eyes can be very accurate bar ometers of our f eelings beca use, to some degr ee, w e ha v e v ery li ttl e control over them. Unlike other areas of the face that are far less reflexive in their movements, evolution has modified muscles in and around the 

Page 185:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  171
BOX 47:  WHAT YOU WON’T SEE IN AN ELEVATOR
Try to tilt your head in an elevator full of strangers and leave it that way for 
the complete duration of the ride. For most people this is extremely diffi-cult to accomplish, because head tilt is a behavior reserved for times when we are truly comfortable—and standing in an elevator surrounded by strangers is certainly not one of those times. Try tilting your head while 
looking directly at someone in the elevator. You will find that even more difficult, if not impossible.
eyes to protect them from hazards. For example, muscles inside the eye-
ball protect the delicate receptors from excessive light by constricting the pupil, and muscles around the eyes will close them immediately if a dan-gerous object comes near. These automatic responses help make the eyes a very honest part of our face, so let’s examine some specific eye behaviors 
Head tilt says in a powerful way, “I am 
comfortable, I am receptive, I am friendly.” It is very difficult to do this around people we don’t like.
Fig. 60

Page 186:
172 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
that can help us achieve insight into what people are thinking and how 
they intend to act.
Pupilary Constriction and Squinting as a Form of Eye Blocking
Research has shown that once we move beyond a startle response, when 
we like something we see, our pupils dilate; when we don’t, they constrict (see figure 61) (Hess, 1975a; Hess, 1975b). W e have no conscious control over our pupils, and they respond to both external stimuli (for example, changes in light) and internal stimuli (such as thoughts) in fractions of a second. Because the pupils are small and difficult to see, particularly in dark eyes, and since changes in their size occur rapidly, pupil reactions are difficult to observe. Although these eye behaviors are very useful, people often don’t look for them, ignore them, or, when they see them, undervalue their utility in assessing a person’s likes and dislikes.
When we become aroused, are surprised, or are suddenly confronted, 
o ur e y es o pen u p—n ot o nl y d o th e y wi d en, b u t th e p u pils also q ui c kl y dilate to let in the maximum amount of available light, thus sending the maximum amount of visual information to the brain. Obviously, this startle response has served us well over millennia. However, once we have a moment to process the information and if it is perceived negatively (it is an unpleasant surprise or an actual threat), in a fraction of a second the pupils will constrict (Ekman, 2003, 151) (see box 48). By constricting the 
In this diagram you can see pupil dilation and constriction. From birth we 
find comfort in dilated pupils, especially those with whom we are emotionally attached.
Fig. 61

Page 187:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  173
BOX 48:  IF THEY CONSTRICT, YOU CAN CONVICT
In 1989, while working with the FBI on a matter involving national secu-
rity, we repeatedly interviewed a spy who, while being cooperative, was nevertheless reluctant to name his co-conspirators involved in espionage. Attempts to appeal to his sense of patriotism and his concern for the mil-lions of people he was placing in harm’s way got us nowhere; things were at an impasse. It was essential that this man’s other associates be identi-
fied; they were still at large and presented a serious threat to the United States. Left with no alternatives, Marc Reeser, a friend and brilliant intel-ligence analyst with the FBI, suggested using nonverbals in an attempt to glean the information we needed.
We presented this spy with thirty-two three-by-five-inch cards pre-
pared by Mr. Reeser, each with the name of someone with whom the felon had worked, and who potentially could have assisted him. As he looked at each card, the man was asked to tell, in general terms, what he knew about each individual. We weren’t specifically interested in the man’s answers, since clearly words can be dishonest; rather, we were watching his face. When he saw two names in particular, his eyes first widened in recognition, and then his pupils quickly constricted and he squinted slightly. Subconsciously, he clearly did not like seeing these two names and somehow felt in danger. Perhaps those individuals had threatened him not to reveal their names. This pupilary constriction and slight squinting were the only clues we had as to the identity of his co-conspirators. He was not aware of his nonverbal signals, and we did 
not comment on them. However, had we not looked for this eye behav-
ior, we never would have identified those two individuals. The two ac-complices were eventually located and interviewed, at which time they confessed their involvement in the crime. To this day, the subject of that interview does not know how we were able to identify his fellow culprits.

Page 188:
174 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
pupils, everything in front of us thus becomes precisely focused so that 
we can see clearly and accurately in order to defend ourselves or effectively escape (Nolte, 1999, 431–432). This is very similar to how a camera aper-ture (opening) works: the smaller the aperture, the greater the focal length, and the clearer the focus on everything near and far. Incidentally, if you ever need an emergency pair of reading glasses and none are available, just make a small pinhole in a piece of paper and hold it up to your eye; the small aperture will bring what you are reading into focus. If maximal pupil constriction isn’t sufficient, then we squint to make the aperture as small as possible while simultaneously protecting the eye (see figure 62).
While walking with my daughter a few years back, we passed some-
one she recognized. She squinted slightly as she gave the girl a low wave. I suspected something negative had transpired between them, so I asked my daughter how she knew the girl. She replied that the girl had been a high school classmate with whom she had previously had words. The low-hand wave was done out of social convention; however, the eye squint was an honest and betraying display of negative emotions 
We squint to block out light or objection-
able things. We squint when we are angry or even when we hear voices, sounds, or music we don’t like.
Fig. 62

Page 189:
and dislike (seven years in the making). My daughter was unaware that 
her squinting behavior had given away her true feelings about the girl, yet the information stood out like a beacon to me (see figure 63).
The same phenomenon is seen in the business world. When custom-
ers or clients suddenly squint while reading a contract, they are likely struggling with something in the wording of the text, the discomfort or doubt registering immediately in their eyes. Most likely these business associates will be totally unaware they are transmitting this very clear message of disagreement or dislike.
In addition to squinting when ill at ease, some individuals will lower 
their eyebrows after observing something unsettling in their environ-ment. Arched eyebrows signify high confidence and positive feelings (a gravity-defying behavior), whereas lowered eyebrows are usually a sign of low confidence and negative feelings, a behavior that indicates weak-ness and insecurity in a person (see box 49).Squinting can be very brief—1⁄8 of 
second—but in real time may reflect a negative thought or emotion.
Fig. 63THE MIND’S CANVAS  175

Page 190:
176 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
Eye Blocking, or How the Brain Spares Itself
Our eyes, more remarkable than any camera, have evolved as the pri-
mary means by which humans receive information. In fact, we often at-tempt to censor incoming data through a limbic survival mechanism known as eye blocking , which evolved to protect the brain from “seeing” 
undesirable images. Any decrease in the size of the eyes, whether through squinting or pupilary constriction, is a form of subconscious blocking behavior. And all blocking behaviors are indicative of concern, dislike, disagreement, or the perception of a potential threat.
The many forms of eye blocking are such a common and natural part 
of our nonverbal repertoire that most people either miss them completely or ignore their meaning (see figures 64–67). For example, think about a time when someone told you bad news. Perhaps you didn’t notice, but BOX 49:  THE EYEBROW SQUINT: HOW LOW DO YOU GO?
Eyebrow squints can have several different meanings. In order to differen-
tiate among these, you need to assess the degree of the eyebrow move-ment and the context in which it takes place. For instance, we sometimes lower our eyebrows and squint when being aggressive or confrontational. Likewise, we lower the eyebrows in the face of real or imagined danger or threats. We also do this when we are annoyed, feel displeasure, or are 
angry. If, however, we drop the eyebrows too low, as may be seen in a very defeated child, it is a universal sign of weakness and insecurity. It is a behavior of obsequiousness, fawning, or submissiveness—consistent with kowtowing or cowering—and may be capitalized upon by social 
predators, such as psychopaths. In studies, prisoners have reported that when new inmates arrive at jail, they look for this troubled, lowered-eye-brow behavior in the newcomers to reveal which ones are weak and inse-cure. In your social and business interactions, you can watch for these eyebrow movements to probe for weakness or strength in others.

Page 191:
Eye blocking with the hands is an 
effective way of saying, “I don’t like what I just heard, saw, or learned.”A brief touch of the eyes during a 
conversation may give you a clue to a person’s negative perception of what is being discussed.
Fig. 64
 Fig. 65
A delay in opening of the eyelids upon 
hearing information or a lengthy closure is indicative of negative emotions or displeasure.Where the lids compress tightly as in 
this photo, the person is trying to block out totally some negative news or event.
Fig. 66
 Fig. 67

Page 192:
178 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
most likely as you heard the information your eyelids closed for a few 
momen ts. This type of blocking beha vior is v ery ancien t in origin and hardwired in our brains; even babies innately eye block within the womb when confronted with loud sounds. Even more amazing is the fact that children who are born blind will cover their eyes when they hear bad news (Knapp & Hall, 2002, 42–52). Throughout our lives we employ this limbic-driven eye-blocking behavior when we hear something terrible, despite the fact that it neither blocks our hearing nor the thoughts that follow. Perhaps it simply serves to give the brain a temporary respite or to communicate our deepest sentiments, but regardless of the reason, the brain still compels us to perform this behavior.
Eye blocking takes many forms and can be observed at any tragic 
event, whether bad news is being broadcast or as tragedy is about to be-fall us. People may cup a hand completely over both eyes, put one open h a n d  o v e r  e a c h  e y e ,  o r  b l o c k  th e  e n t i r e  f a c e  w i th  a n  o b j e c t ,  s u c h  a s  a  newspaper or book. Even internal information in the form of a thought can compel this response. A person who suddenly remembers he forgot something important may momentarily close his eyes and take a deep breath as he ponders his blunder.
When interpreted in context, eye-blocking behaviors can be powerful 
indicators of a person’s thoughts and feelings. These distancing clues oc-cur in real time as soon as something negative is heard. During conversa-tion, this is one of the best signals to let us know that something spoken did not sit well with the person hearing the information.
I have repeatedly used eye-blocking behavior as a tell in my work with 
the FBI. The “ice-pick” murder and the hotel fire in Puerto Rico, dis-cussed earlier in this book, are only two of the many, many times I wit-nessed the significance of this eye behavior. I still watch for eye-blocking behavior on a daily basis to assess the feelings and thoughts of others.
While eye-blocking behaviors are usually associated with seeing or 
hearing something negative that causes us discomfort, they can also be an indication of low confidence. As with most other tells, the eye-blocking response is most reliable and valuable when it happens immediately after a significant event that you can identify. If an eye block occurs right after 

Page 193:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  179
you tell a person a specific piece of information, or upon making some 
type of an offer, it should tell you that something is amiss and the indi-vidual is troubled. At this point, you might want to rethink how you wish to proceed if your goal is to enhance your chances of interpersonal success with this person.
Pupilary Dilation, Eyebrow Arching, and Flashbulb Eyes
There are plenty of eye behaviors that show positive feelings. At a very 
young age, our eyes register comfort when we see our mothers. A baby will follow his mother’s face within seventy-two hours of birth, and his eyes will widen when she enters the room, demonstrating interest and contentment. The loving mother will likewise exhibit a relaxed opening of her eyes, and the baby will gaze into them and take comfort from her. Widened eyes are a positive sign; they indicate that someone is observing something that makes her feel good.
Contrary to pupil constriction, contentment and positive emotions are 
indicated by pupil dilation. The brain is essentially saying, “I like what I see; let me see it better!” When people are truly pleased by what they see, not only do their pupils dilate, but their eyebrows rise (arch), widening their eye area and making their eyes look larger (see figures 68, 69, 70) (Knapp & Hall, 2002, 62–64). In addition, some people dramatically ex-pand the aperture of their eyes by opening their eyes as big and wide as possible, creating an appearance known as flashbulb eyes . This is the 
wide-eyed look normally associated with surprise or positive events (see box 50). This is also another form of the gravity-defying behaviors usu-ally associated with good feelings.
Eye Flash
A variant on the flashbulb eyes is the eyebrow raise or eye flash  that takes 
place very quickly, staccato-like, during a positive emotional event. Not only is this behavior universally recognized as indicative of a pleasant sur-prise (think of someone arriving at a surprise party), but it is also used for 

Page 194:
When we are content, our eyes are 
relaxed and show little tension.Here the eyebrows are arched slightly, 
defying gravity, a sure sign of positive feelings.
Fig. 69
 Fig. 68
Flashbulb eyes can be seen when we are 
excited to see someone or are full of positive emotions we just can’t hold back.
Fig. 70

Page 195:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  181
emphasis, and to show intensity . It is very common to see people saying, 
“Wow!” as they raise their eyebrows and flash their eyes. This is a very genuine positive display. When someone is excitedly emphasizing a point or telling a story, the brow raise should occur. It reflects the true mood of the individual, and it also clears the way for greater visual clar-ity.
Perhaps the best utility of the brow raise is to note when someone 
stops doing it while telling a story. Often, when we are not emotionally attached to something being said, there will be no eye emphasis. Such an observed lack of attachment may simply reflect decreased interest or may occur because what is being said is not the truth. Distinguishing between BOX 50:  WHEN THE FLASHBULB GOES OFF
When we see someone we like or are surprised by running into a person 
we haven’t seen in a while, we tend to expand our eyes to make them as big as possible, concurrent with pupilary dilation. In a work environment, you can assume the boss really likes you or that you did something really well if his or her eyes open very wide when looking at you.
You can use this affirming behavior to determine if you are on the 
right track, whether courting, doing business, or just trying to make friends. For example, picture the exaggerated dreamy eyes of a young girl in love as she stares at her date with adoration. In short, watch the eyes—the bigger they get, the better things are! On the other hand, when 
you start to see eye shrinkage, such as squinting, eyebrows dropping, or pupils constricting, you may want to rethink and change your behavioral tactics.
I will express a note of caution. Pupil dilation and constriction can be 
caused by factors unrelated to emotions or events, such as variation in lighting, some medical conditions, and certain drugs. Be careful to con-sider these factors, or you could be misled.

Page 196:
182 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
these causes is difficult; essentially all you can do is look for a decrease in 
brow raises, or their sudden absence, to alert you that something has changed. It is remarkable how often people will change their facial em-phasis (their eyebrow flashes) as they become less and less committed to what they are saying or doing.
Eye-Gaze Behavior
It is universal that when we look directly at others, we either like them, 
are curious about them, or want to threaten them. Lovers stare into each other’s eyes with great frequency, as do mother and child; but so do predators who use a direct gaze to either mesmerize or threaten (think of stares of T ed Bundy and Charles Manson). In other words, the brain employs a single eye behavior—a strong gaze—to communicate love, interest, or hate. Therefore, we must rely on other facial displays that ac-company eye-gaze behavior  to determine liking (a relaxed smile) or dislike 
(tightened jaws, compressed lips).
Conversely, when we gaze away during a conversation, we tend to do so 
to engage a thought more clearly without the distraction of looking at the person with whom we are talking. This behavior is often mistaken as rude-ness or as personal rejection, which it is not. Nor is it a sign of deception or disinterest; in fact, it is actually a comfort display  (Vrij, 2003, 88–89). When 
talking to friends, we routinely look in the distance as we converse. W e do this because we feel comfortable enough to do so; the limbic brain detects no threats from this person. Do not assume someone is being deceptive, disin-terested, or displeased just because he or she looks away. Clarity of thought is often enhanced by looking away, and that is the reason we do it.
There are many other reasons for looking away from a speaker. A 
downward gaze may demonstrate that we are processing a sentiment or a feeling, conducting an internal dialogue, or perhaps demonstrat-ing submissiveness. In many cultures, a downward gaze or other form of eye aversion  is expected in the face of authority or in the presence of 
a high-status individual. Often children are taught to look down hum-bly when being chastised by a parent or adult (Johnson, 2007, 277–290). 

Page 197:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  183
In embarrassing situations, onlookers may avert their eyes out of cour-
tesy. Never assume that a downward gaze is a sign of deception.
In all cultures in which it has been studied, science validates that 
those who are dominant have more freedom in using eye-gaze behavior. In essence, these individuals are entitled to look wherever they want. Subordinates, however, are more restricted in where they can look and w h e n .  H u m i l i t y  d i c t a t e s  t h a t  i n  t h e  p r e s e n c e  o f  r o y a l t y ,  a s  i n  c h u r c h ,  heads are bowed. As a general rule, dominants tend to ignore subordi-nates visually while subordinates tend to gaze at dominant individuals at a distance. In other words, higher-status individuals can be indifferent while lower-status persons are required to be attentive with their gaze. The king is free to look at anyone he wants; but all subjects face the king, even as they back out of a room.
Many employers have told me that they dislike it during an interview 
when applicants’ eyes are wandering all over the room “as though they own the place.” Because roving eyes make a person look disinterested or superior, doing so always leaves a bad impression. Even if you are at-tempting to ascertain whether or not you would like to work there, you will likely never get the chance if your eyes do not focus on the person speaking during a job interview.
Eye-Blink / Eye-Flutter Behavior
Our blink rate increases when we are aroused, troubled, nervous, or 
concerned, and it returns to normal when we are relaxed. A series of rapid eye blinks may reflect an inner struggle. For instance, if someone says something we don’t like, we may actually flutter our eyelids. Simi-larly, we might also do so if we are having trouble expressing ourselves in a conversation (see box 51). Eyelid flutter is very much indicative of a struggle either with our performance or with the delivery or accep-tance of information. Perhaps more than any other actor, British actor Hugh Grant uses eyelid flutter to communicate that he is befuddled, nonplussed, struggling, or otherwise in trouble.
Students of nonverbal communication often note how President 

Page 198:
184 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
Richard Nixon’s blink rate increased when he made his “I am not a 
crook” speech. The fact is eye-blink frequency will likely increase in any-one under stress whether he is lying or not. I reviewed President Bill Clinton’s eye-blink rate during his deposition, and it increased fivefold as a result of the stress he was under. Though it’s tempting to do so, I would be very reluctant to label anyone a liar just because their blink rate in-creases, since any stress, including being asked questions in public, can cause the blink rate to increase.
Looking Askance
Looking askance  at others is a behavior that is performed with the head 
and eyes (see figure 71). It can take the form of a sideways or tilted head motion accompanied by a side glance or a brief roll of the eyes. Looking askance is a display that is seen when we are suspicious of others or BOX 51:  FLUTTER FOCUS
Observing for eyelid flutter can help you read people and adjust your be-
havior accordingly. For instance, in a social gathering or business meet-ing, the socially adept will look for this behavior to assess participants’ comfort. Something is troubling the individual whose lids are quivering. This nonverbal is very accurate, and in some people it will start precisely at the moment an issue arises. For instance, in conversation, an onset of 
eyelid flutter indicates the subject has become controversial or unaccept-able and a change of topic is probably in order. The sudden appearance of this nonverbal signal is important and should not be ignored, if you want your guests to be comfortable. Since people vary in their blink rate 
or eyelid fluttering—particularly if they are adjusting to new contact lenses—you should look for changes in flutter rate, such as a sudden absence or increase in flutter, to gain insight into a person’s thoughts and feelings.

Page 199:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  185
question the validity of what they are saying. Sometimes this body sig-
nal is very quick; at other times it may be almost sarcastically exagger -ated and last throughout an encounter. While more curious or wary t h a n  c l e a r l y  d i s r e s p e c t f u l ,  t h i s  n o n v e r b a l  i s  f a i r l y  e a s y  t o  s p o t  a n d  i t s  message is, “I am listening to you but I am not buying what you’re say-ing—at least not yet.”
UNDERSTANDING NONVERBAL 
BEHAVIORS OF THE MOUTH
Like the eyes, the mouth provides a number of relatively reliable and 
noteworthy tells that can assist you in dealing more effectively with peo-ple. Like the eyes, the mouth can also be manipulated by the thinking brain to send out false signals, so caution must be exercised in interpreta-tion. That said here are some focal points of interest with regard to the body language of the mouth.We look askance at people when we are 
distrustful or unconvinced, as in this photo.
Fig. 71

Page 200:
186 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 52:  THE SMILE BAROMETER
With practice, it won’t take you long to distinguish between a fake smile 
and the real thing. One easy way to speed the learning process is to watch how people you know greet others based on how they feel about them. For example, if you know your business partner feels good about individual A and dislikes individual B and both have been invited to an office party he is hosting, watch his face as he meets each person at the 
door. You’ll be able to distinguish the two types of smiles in no time at all!
Once you can distinguish between a false and real smile, you can use 
it as a barometer of how people really  feel about you and you can respond 
accordingly. You can also look for the different types of smiles to gauge how your ideas or suggestions are coming across to the listener. Ideas that are greeted with genuine smiles should be explored further and put on the fast-track to-do list. Suggestions that are met with the fake smile 
should be reevaluated or put on the back burner.
This smile barometer works with friends, spouses, co-workers, chil-
dren, and even your boss. It provides information about people’s feelings in all types and phases of interpersonal interaction.A False Smile and a Real Smile
It is well known by researchers that humans have both a fake and a real 
smile (Ekman, 2003, 205–207). The fake smile is used almost as a social obligation toward those who are not close to us, while the real smile is reserved for those people and events we truly care about (see box 52).
A real smile appears primarily because of the action of two muscles: 
the zygomaticus major,  which stretches from the corner of the mouth to 
the cheekbone, and the orbicularis oculi , which surrounds the eye. When 
working together bilaterally, these draw the corners of the mouth up and crinkle the outer edges of the eyes, causing the crow’s feet of a familiar warm and honest smile (see figure 72).

Page 201:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  187
When we exhibit a social or false smile, the lip corner stretches side-
ways through the use of a muscle called the risorius.  When used bilat-
erally, these effectively pull the corners of the mouth sideways but cannot lift them upward, as is the case with a true smile (see figure 73). Interestingly, babies several weeks old will already reserve the full zy-gomatic smile for their mothers and utilize the risorius smile for all others. If you are unhappy, it is unlikely that you will be able to smile fully using both the zygomaticus majoris and the orbicularis oculi muscles. Real smiles are difficult to fake when we have a sincere lack of emotion.
Disappearing Lips, Lip Compression, and the Upside-Down U
If it seems like the lips have disappeared from every photograph you 
have seen recently of anyone testifying before Congress, it is because A real smile forces the corners of the 
mouth up toward the eyes.This is a fake or “polite smile”: the corners 
of the mouth move toward the ears and there is little emotion in the eyes.
Fig. 72
 Fig. 73

Page 202:
188 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
of stress. I say this with assurance, because when it comes to stress 
(like testifying before Congress), nothing is more universal than dis-appearing lips. When we are stressed, we tend to make our lips disap-pear subconsciously.
When we press our lips together, it is as if the limbic brain is telling us 
to shut down and not allow anything into our bodies (see figure 74), be-cause at this moment we are consumed with serious issues. Lip compres-s i o n  i s  v e r y  i n d i c a t i v e  o f  t r u e  n e g a t i v e  s e n t i m e n t  t h a t  m a n i f e s t s  q u i t e  vividly in real time (see box 53). It is a clear sign that a person is troubled and that something is wrong. It rarely, if ever, has a positive connotation. This does not mean the person is being deceptive. It just means that they are stressed at the moment.
In the following series of photographs (see figures 75–78), I dem-
onstrate how the lips progressively go from full (things are OK) to disappearing or compressed lips (things are not OK). Note especially on the final photograph (figure 78) how the corner of the mouth turns down, making the mouth look like an upside-down U. This behavior When the lips disappear, there is usually 
stress or anxiety driving this behavior.
Fig. 74

Page 203:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  189
BOX 53:  WHEN DISAPPEARING LIPS AREN’T THE ONLY 
THINGS BEING HIDDEN
I look for lip compression or disappearing lips during interviews or when 
someone is making a declarative statement. This is such a reliable cue that it will show up precisely at the moment a difficult question is asked. If you see it, that doesn’t necessarily mean the person is lying. Instead, it indicates that a very specific question served as a negative stimulus and really bothered the person. For example, if I ask someone, “Are you hiding something from me?” and he compresses his lips as I ask the question, he is hiding something. This is especially accurate if it is the 
only time he has concealed or compressed his lips during our discus-sion. It is a signal that I need to push further in questioning this per-son.
is indicative of high distress  (discomfort). This is a formidable cue or 
signal that the person is experiencing an extreme amount of stress.
In my classes (you might want to try this with friends), I tell students to 
mak e th e ir li ps disa p pear o r com p r ess th em an d t o l oo k ar o un d a t ea c h o th e r .  W h a t  th e y  s o o n  r e a l i z e ,  w h e n  I  p o i n t  i t  o u t  t o  th e m ,  i s  th e y  c a n make their lips disappear, but usually it is in a straight line. Most people who try this cannot force the corners of the mouth down into an upside-d o w n  U  s h a p e .  W h y ?  B e c a u s e  t h i s  i s  a  l i m b i c  r e s p o n s e  t h a t  i s  h a r d  t o  mimic unless we are really distressed or grieving. Do keep in mind that for some people, the turned-down corners of the mouth is a normal behavior and as such is not an accurate sign of distress. However, for the large major-
ity of us, this is a very accurate tell of negative thoughts or sentiments.
The Lip Purse
Be sure to look for individuals who purse their lips while you or someone else 
is talking (see figure 79). This behavior usually means they disagree with 

Page 204:
Note that when the lips are full, usually 
the person is content.When there is stress, the lips will begin 
to disappear and tighten.
Fig. 75
 Fig. 76
Lip compression, reflecting stress or 
anxiety, may progress to the point where the lips disappear, as in this photo.When the lips disappear and the corners 
of the mouth turn down, emotions and confidence are at a low point, while anxiety, stress, and concerns are running high.
Fig. 77
 Fig. 78

Page 205:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  191
what is being said or they are considering an alternative thought or idea. 
Knowing this information can be very valuable in helping you determine how to present your case, modify your offer, or guide the conversation. T o ascertain whether the lip purse means disagreement or rather that the person is considering an alternative point of view, you should monitor the ongoing conversation long enough to gather additional clues.
Lip pursing is often seen during closing arguments at a trial. While 
one attorney speaks, the opposing counsel will purse his or her lips in disagreement. Judges also do it as they disagree with attorneys during side-bar conferences. While reviewing contracts, watching for—and spotting—lip-pursing behaviors can help attorneys decipher the concerns or issues of opposing counsel. Lip pursing can be seen during police in-terviews, especially when confronting a suspect with the wrong informa-tion. The suspect will purse his lips in disagreement because he knows the investigator has the facts wrong.
In business settings, lip pursing occurs all the time and should be con-
sidered an effective means of gathering information about a situation. For We purse our lips or pucker them when 
we are in disagreement with something or someone, or we are thinking of a possible alternative.
Fig. 79

Page 206:
192 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
example, as a paragraph is being read from a contract, those opposed to a 
p a r t i c u l a r  i t e m  o r  s e n t e n c e  w i l l  p u r s e  t h e i r  l i p s  a t  t h e  v e r y  m o m e n t  t h e  words are uttered. Or, as individuals are being mentioned for promotion, you will see lip pursing as the name of someone less desirable is being men-tioned.
Lip pursing is so accurate that it really should be given greater atten-
tion. It shows up in numerous settings and circumstances and is a very reliable indicator that a person is thinking alternatively or is completely rejecting what is being said.
The Sneer
The sneer, like the rolling of the eyes, is a universal act of contempt. It is 
disrespectful and reflects a lack of caring or empathy on the part of the person doing the sneering. When we sneer, the buccinator muscles  (on 
the sides of our face) contract to draw the lip corners sideward toward the ears and produce a sneering dimple in the cheeks. This expression is very visible and meaningful even if it is flashed for just a moment (see 
A sneer fleetingly signifies disrespect or 
disdain. It says “I care little for you or your thoughts.”
Fig. 80

Page 207:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  193
BOX 54:  NOTHING TO SNEER AT
At the University of Washington, researcher John Gottman discovered 
during therapy with married couples that if one or both partners sneered, this was a significant and “potent signal” for predicting the likelihood of a breakup. Once disregard or contempt has entered the psyche, as indi-cated by a sneer, the relationship is troubled or even terminal. I have noted during FBI investigations that suspects will sneer during interviews 
when they think they know more than the interviewer or sense that the officer does not know the full picture. In either circumstance, a sneer is a distinct sign of disrespect or contempt for another person.
figure 80). A sneer can be very illuminating with regard to what is go-
ing on in a person’s mind and what that may portend (see box 54).
Tongue Displays
There are numerous tongue signals that can provide us with valuable 
insights into a person’s thoughts or moods. When we are stressed, caus-ing our mouth to be dry, it is normal to lick our lips to moisten them. Also, during times of discomfort, we tend to rub our tongues back and forth across our lips to pacify and calm ourselves. We may stick out the tongue (usually to the side) as we focus assiduously on a task (for example when basketball great Michael Jordan goes up for a dunk) or we may poke out our tongue to antagonize someone we dislike or to show disgust (children do this all the time).
When an individual displays other mouth cues associated with stress, 
such as lip biting, mouth touching, lip licking, or object biting, it further bolsters a careful observer’s belief that the person is insecure (see figure 81). Additionally, if people touch and/or lick their lips while pondering their options, particular l y w hen they tak e an un usual amoun t of time, these are signs of insecurity.

Page 208:
194 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
Tongue-jutting behavior  is a gesture used by people who think they 
have gotten away with something or are caught doing something. I have seen this behavior in flea markets both here and in Russia, among street vendors in Lower Manhattan, at poker tables in Las Vegas, during in-terviews at the FBI, and in business meetings. In each case, the person made the gesture—tongue between the teeth without touching the lips—at the conclusion of some sort of a deal or as a final nonverbal statement (see figure 82). This, in its own way, is a transactional behav-ior . I t seems to presen t subconsciousl y at the end of social in teractions and has a variety of meanings that must be taken in context. Its several meanings include: I got caught, gleeful excitement, I got away with something, I did something foolish, or I am naughty.
Just today, as I was going over some notes for this book, the attendant 
at the university cafeteria placed the wrong vegetables on the plate of the student directly in front of me. When the student spoke up to correct the error, the attendant jutted her tongue out between her teeth and raised her shoulders as if to say, “Oops, I made a mistake.”Lip licking is a pacifying behavior that 
tends to soothe and calm us down. You see it in class just before a test.
Fig. 81

Page 209:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  195
I n soc i al o r b us in es s d i scus s i o n s, thi s t o n gu e - j u t be ha v i o r i s us uall y 
seen toward the end of the dialogue, when one person feels he has gotten away with something and the other party has failed to detect or pursue the matter. If you see tongue-jutting behavior, ask yourself what just transpired. Consider whether you may have been fooled or cheated, or that you or someone else just made a mistake. This is the time to assess whether someone is putting one over on you.
OTHER NONVERBAL BEHAVIORS OF THE FACE
Furrowed Forehead
Frowning, by furrowing the forehead (and brow), usually occurs when 
a person is anxious, sad, concentrating, concerned, bewildered, or angry (see figure 83). A forehead furrow needs to be examined in context to Tongue jutting is seen when people get 
caught doing something they shouldn’t, they screw up, or they are getting away with something. It is very brief.
Fig. 82

Page 210:
196 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
determine its true meaning. For instance, I saw a supermarket cashier 
closing out her register drawer, frowning as she went about counting her cash. You could see the intensity and concentration of her expression, as she tried to square the totals at the end of her shift. The same frown can be observed in someone who has just been arrested and is being led out past reporters. The furrowed forehead is usually present when someone finds himself in an untenable or disagreeable situation but can’t escape, which is why you usually see it on arrest mug shots.
Incidentally , this frowning behavior is so ancient and so common to 
mammals that even dogs will recognize it when we look at them with a furrowed brow. Dogs themselves can exhibit a similar expression when they are anxious, sad, or concentrating. Another interesting fact with re-gard to frowning is that as we get older and add to our life experiences, our foreheads develop deeper and deeper furrows that eventually become permanent wrinkles. Just as permanent smile lines may develop from a lifetime of positive nonverbals and signify a happy life, a person with a A furrowed forehead is an easy way to 
assess for discomfort or anxiety. When we are happy and content, you hardly see this behavior.
Fig. 84

Page 211:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  197
wrinkled brow likely has had a challenging life in which he engaged in 
frequent frowning.
Nasal Wing Dilation (Nose Flare)
As discussed previously, the flaring of nostrils is a facial cue that signals 
that a person is aroused. Lovers can often be seen hovering around each other, their nostrils subtly flaring in excitement and anticipation. Most l i k e l y ,  l o v e r s  e n g a g e  i n  th i s  s u b c o n s c i o u s  b e h a v i o r  a s  th e y  a b s o r b  e a c h  other’s scents of sexual attraction known as pheromones  (Givens, 2005, 
191–208). Nose flaring is also an intention cue, a potent indicator of the intent to do something physical, and not necessarily sexual. It can be any-thing from getting ready to climb some steep stairs to preparing to move a bookcase. As people prepare to act physically, they will oxygenate, which causes the nostrils to flare.
As a law enforcement officer, if I encounter a person on the street 
looking down, his feet in the ready or “pugilistic position,” with his nose flaring, I suspect that he is probably preparing to do one of three things: argue, run, or fight. Nasal wing dilation is something you should always be watching for if you are around someone who might have reason either to attack or run away from you. It is just one of many suspicious behav-iors we should teach our children to watch for. That way they will be more aware when people are becoming dangerous, especially at school or on playgrounds.
Nail-Biting and Related Signs of Stress
If you see a person biting his nails while waiting to close a deal, he 
probably does not impress you as being very confident. Nail-biting is an indication of stress, insecurity, or discomfort. When you see it in a bar-gaining session, even if just for a moment, it is safe to assume that the nail-biter is unsure of himself and/or is bargaining from a position of weakness. People interviewing for jobs or young men waiting for their dates to arrive should avoid biting their nails, not only because it looks 

Page 212:
198 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
unsightly, but also because nail-biting shouts, “I am insecure.” We bite 
our nails not because they need trimming primarily, but rather because it pacifies us.
Facial Blushing and Blanching
Sometimes we will involuntarily blush or blanch based on deep emo-
tional states. T o demonstrate blushing behavior in my classes, I will make a student stand in front of the group and then I will come up be-hind and get very close to the back of his or her neck. Usually this viola-tion of the person’s space will be enough to cause a limbic reaction, making the face blush. On some people, especially fair-skinned individu-a l s ,  t h i s  c a n  b e  v e r y  n o t i c e a b l e .  P e o p l e  w i l l  a l s o  b l u s h  w h e n  t h e y  a r e  caught doing something they know is wrong. Then there is the blushing that occurs when a person likes someone but doesn’t want him or her to know it. T eenagers who harbor a secret crush on someone will often blush when that particular person draws near. This is a true limbic re-sponse that is transmitted by the body and is relatively easy to spot.
Conversely, blanching (turning pale) can take place when we are in 
the sustained limbic reaction known as shock. I have seen blanching as a result of a traffic accident or in an interview in which person was sud-d e n l y  p r e s e n t e d  w i t h  o v e r w h e l m i n g  e v i d e n c e  o f  h i s  g u i l t .  B l a n c h i n g  takes place as the involuntary nervous system hijacks all the surface ves-sels and channels the blood to our larger muscles to prepare for escape or attack. I know of at least one case where an individual was so surprised to be arrested that he suddenly blanched and had a fatal heart attack. Although these behaviors are only skin deep, we should not ignore them, as they are indicative of high stress and will present differently according to the nature and the duration of the circumstances.
Disapproval Cues through Facial Expressions
Disapproval cues vary around the world and reflect a specific culture’s 
social norms. In Russia, I have had people look at me with scorn because 

Page 213:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  199
I was whistling while walking down the hallway of an art museum. It 
seems that whistling indoors is a no-no in Russia. In Montevideo, I was among a group that was sanctioned with squinting eyes followed by a dismissive turn of the face away. Apparently our group was talking too loudly and locals did not appreciate our boisterous humor. In the United States, because the country is so large and diverse, different locales will have different disapproval displays; what you see in the Midwest is differ-ent from what you see in New England or New York.
Most disapproval displays show on the face and are among the earliest 
messages we learn from our parents and siblings. Those who care for us will give us “that face” to let us know if we are doing something wrong or getting out of line. My father, who is very stoic, had “the look” down pat; all he had to do was glance at me sternly and that was enough. It was a look that even my friends feared. The man never had to castigate us verbally. He just gave us that unmistakable glance, and that was it.
For the most part, we are fairly adept at understanding disapproval 
cues, although at times they can be very subtle (see box 55). Recognizing censure is a key to learning the unwritten rules and conventions of a country or area, as it conveys when we have broken them. These signals help us know when we are being rude. Undeserved and inappropriate displays of disapproval or censure, however, are likewise rude. One non-verbal of disapproval too commonly seen in America is rolling of the eyes. This is a sign of disrespect and must not be tolerated, especially from subordinates, staff, or children.
Facial displays of disgust or disapproval are very honest and are reflec-
tive of what is going on in the brain. Disgust likely registers primarily on the face because this is the part of our anatomy that was adapted, over millions o f  y e a r s ,  t o  r e j e c t  s p o i l e d  f o o d  o r  a n y t h i n g  e l s e  t h a t  m i g h t  h a r m  u s .  A l -th o ugh th ese f a cial dis pla y s ma y r an ge fr om m u t ed t o ob vi o us—w h e th e r c o nf r o n t e d wi th n e g a ti v e o r d i s p l eas in g inf o rm a ti o n o r w h e n tas tin g ba d food—as far as the brain is concerned, the sentiment is the same. “I don’t like this, get it away from me.” No matter how slight the grimace or look of distaste or displeasure, we can be confident in interpreting these behaviors accurately because they are governed by the limbic system (see box 56).

Page 214:
200 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
BOX 55:  A WATERED-DOWN SALES PITCH
Not long ago, I was approached by a saleswoman for a major chain of 
gyms in central Florida. The young lady was very enthusiastic to have me join the gym, stating it would only cost me a dollar a day for the rest of the year. As I listened, she became even more animated, as I think she saw me as a good prospect. When it was my turn to speak I asked if the gym had a pool. She said no, but that it had other great features. I then men-
tioned that currently I paid twenty-two dollars per month to attend my gym and that it had an Olympic-size pool. As I spoke, she looked down at her feet while making a microgesture of disgust (her nose and the left side of her mouth lifted upward) (see figure 84). It was a short and fleeting 
gesture, and if it had lasted longer, it would have looked like a snarl. This microgesture was enough for me to know that she was displeased with what I said, and after a second or two she made an excuse to leave me and approach someone else. Sales pitch over.
That was neither the first nor the last time I observed such behavior. 
In fact, I have often seen it in negotiations, where an offer is made and one of the participants involved suddenly and without conscious thought made a similar microgesture of disgust. When rejecting food being ten-dered in Latin America, it is very common to perform this behavior while shaking the head side to side, without saying a word. Interestingly, what is seen as rude in one setting or country may be a perfectly acceptable gesture in another. The key to successful travel is to know the customs in advance, so you know what to do and what to expect.

Page 215:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  201
BOX 56:  TILL DISGUST DO US PART
Just how accurate is this disgust gesture in revealing our inner thoughts 
and intentions? Here’s a personal example. While I was visiting with a friend and his fiancée, he spoke of their upcoming marriage and honey-moon plans. Unbeknownst to him, I witnessed her make a facial micro-gesture of disgust as he uttered the word marriage.  It was an extremely 
fleeting gesture, and I thought it odd since the topic appeared to be something about which both of them should have been excited. Months later, my friend called to tell me that his fiancée had backed out of the 
wedding. I had seen, in that single gesture, her brain registering its true 
sentiments without equivocation. The thought of going through with the marriage was repulsive to her.
We crinkle our noses to indicate dislike or 
disgust. This is very accurate but at times fleeting. In some cultures it is really pronounced.
Fig. 84

Page 216:
202 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
GRAVITY-DEFYING BEHAVIORS OF THE FACE
The old adage “Keep your chin up” is a remark directed at someone who 
is in th e d o l drums o r e x pe ri en cin g mis f o rtun e ( see fi gur es 8 5 an d 86) . This bit of folk wisdom accurately reflects our limbic response to adver-sity. A person with his chin down is seen as lacking confidence and expe-riencing negative sentiments while a person with his chin up is perceived as being in a positive frame of mind.
What is true with the chin is also true for the nose. A nose-up grav-
ity-defying gesture is a high-confidence nonverbal tell, while a nose-down position is a display of low confidence. When people are stressed or upset, the chin (and nose, since it must follow along) tends not to be held high. T ucking the chin is a form of withdrawal or distancing and can be very accurate in discerning true negative sentiment.
In Europe, in particular, you see a lot more of these behaviors, espe-
cially holding the nose high when looking down on those of lower class or snubbing someone. I was watching French television while traveling 
When confidence is low or we are 
concerned for ourselves, the chin will tuck in, forcing the nose down.When we feel positive, the chin comes 
out and the nose is high: both signs of comfort and confidence.
Fig. 85
 Fig. 86

Page 217:
THE MIND’S CANVAS  203
abroad and noted how one politician, when asked a question he deemed 
beneath him, merely raised his nose high, looking down on the re-porter, and answered “No, I will not answer that.” The nose reflected his status and attitude of contempt for the reporter. Charles de Gaulle, a rather complex individual who eventually became the president of F r an ce, w as f am o us f o r p r o j ectin g this kin d o f ha u g h ty a tti tu d e an d image.
The Rule of Mixed Signals
Sometimes we don’t say what we’re really thinking, but our faces reflect 
it anyway. For example, someone who is looking repeatedly at his watch or at the nearest exit is letting you know he is either running late, has an appointment, or would rather be elsewhere. This kind of look is an in-tention cue.
Other times, we say one thing but really believe otherwise. This 
brings us to a general rule when it comes to interpreting emotions and/or words by looking at facial expressions. When confronted with mixed signals from the face (such as happiness cues along with anxiety signals or pleasure behaviors seen alongside displeasure displays), or if the ver-bal and nonverbal facial messages are not in agreement, always side with the negative emotion as the more honest of the two. The negative sentiment will almost always be the more accurate and genuine of the person’s feelings and emotions. For instance, if someone says, “So happy to see you,” with jaws tightened, the statement is false. The tension in the face reveals the true emotion the person is feeling. Why side with the n e g a t i v e  e m o t i o n ?  B e c a u s e  o u r  m o s t  i m m e d i a t e  r e a c t i o n  t o  a n  o b j e c -tionable situation is usually the most accurate; it is only after a moment when we realize that others might see us that we mask that initial re-s p o n s e  w i t h  s o m e  f a c i a l  b e h a v i o r  t h a t  i s  m o r e  s o c i a l l y  a c c e p t a b l e .  S o  when confronted with both, go with the first emotion observed, espe-cially if it is a negative emotion.

Page 218:
204 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
CONCLUDING THOUGHTS ON THE FACE
Because the face can convey so many different expressions and because 
we are taught to mask our facial displays at an early age, anything you observe on the face should be compared with the nonverbals of the rest of the body. In addition, because facial-cue behaviors are so complex, it may be difficult to interpret whether they reflect comfort or discomfort. If you are confused as to the meaning of a facial expression, reenact it and sense how it makes you feel. You will find this little trick may help you decipher what you just observed. The face can reveal a great deal of in-formation but it can also mislead. You need to look for clusters of behav-iors, constantly evaluate what you see in its context, and note whether the f a cial ex p r ess i on agr ees wi th—o r is in con tr as t t o—s i gnals fr om oth e r parts of the body. Only by performing all of these observations can you confidently validate your assessment of a person’s emotions and in-tentions.

Page 219:
EIGHT
Detecting Deception
Proceed with Caution!
 Throughout the book, we’ve touched on many examples of nonver-
bal behavior, the body signals we can utilize to better understand 
the feelings, thoughts, and intentions of others. By now, I hope you 
have been persuaded that with these nonverbal clues, you can accurately 
assess what every body  is saying, in any setting. There is, however, one 
type of human behavior that is difficult to read, and that is deception.
You might assume that as a career FBI agent who has at times been 
called a human lie detector, I can spot deceit with relative ease, and even 
teach you to become a personal polygraph in short order. Nothing could 
be further from the truth! In reality, it is extremely difficult to detect 
deception—far more so than getting an accurate read on the other be-
haviors we have discussed throughout this book.
It is precisely because of my experience as an FBI agent involved in 
behavioral analysis—a person who has spent his entire career attempting 

Page 220:
206 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
to detect lies—that I recognize and appreciate the difficulties in accu-
rately assessing deceptive behavior. It is also for that reason that I have chosen to devote an entire chapter—and to end this book—with a realis-
tic appraisal and application of nonverbal behaviors in detecting decep-
tion. Lots of books have been written on this subject that make it sound easy, even for amateurs. I assure you, it is not!
I believe this is the first time a career law enforcement and counter-
in t e lli g e n ce o ffi ce r wi th a co ns i d e r a b l e ba c k gr o un d in this fi e l d, an d who still teaches in the intelligence community, has stepped forward to sound this warning: most people—both laypersons and profession-als—are not very good at detecting lies. Why make this statement? Because, unfortunately, I have seen too many investigators misinterpret non v e r bal beha vi o rs o v e r the y ears, making innocen t peopl e f eel cul -pable or unnecessarily uncomfortable. I have also seen both amateurs and professionals make claims that are outrageous, ruining lives in the process. T oo many people have gone to jail for giving false confessions just because an officer mistook a stress response for a lie. Newspapers are replete with horror stories, including the one about the New York Central Park jogger, wherein officers mistook nonverbals of stress for deception and pressured the innocent into confessions (Kassin, 2004, 172–194; Kassin, 2006, 207–227). It is my hope that readers of this book will have a more realistic and honest picture of what can and cannot be achieved through the nonverbal approach to detecting deception, and, armed with this knowledge, they will take a more reasoned, cautious approach to declaring when a person is or is not telling the truth.
DECEPTION: A TOPIC WORTHY OF STUDY
We all have a stake in the truth. Society functions based on an assump-tion that people will abide by their word—that truth prevails over men-dacity. For the most part, it does. If it didn’t, relationships would have a short shelf life, commerce would cease, and trust between parents and children would be destroyed. All of us depend on honesty, because when 

Page 221:
DETECTING DECEPTION  207
truth is lacking we suffer, and society suffers. When Adolf Hitler lied to 
Neville Chamberlain, there was not peace in our time, and over fifty million people paid the price with their lives. When Richard Nixon lied to the nation, it destroyed the respect many had for the office of the president. When Enron executives lied to their employees, thousands of lives were ruined overnight. We count on our government and commer-cial institutions to be honest and truthful. We need and expect our friends and family to be truthful. Truth is essential for all relations be they personal, professional, or civic.
We are fortunate that, for the most part, people are honest and that 
most of the lies we hear daily are actually social or “white” lies, meant to protect us from the true answer to questions such as “Do I look fat in this outfit?” Unquestionably, when it comes to more serious matters, it is in our own self-interest to assess and determine the truth of what we are told. Achieving this, however, is not easy. For thousands of years, people have been using soothsayers and all manner of dubious techniques—such as putting a hot knife on a person’s tongue—to detect deception. Even today, some organizations use handwriting samples, voice-stress analysis, or the polygraph to spot liars. All of these methods have ques-tionable results. There is no method, no machine, no test, no person that is 100 percent accurate at uncovering deception. Even the vaunted polygraph is accurate only 60 to 80 percent of the time, depending on the operator of the instrument (Ford, 1996, 230–232; Cumming, 2007).
Looking For Liars
The truth is that identifying deceit is so difficult that repeated studies 
begun in the 1980s show that most of us—including judges, attorneys, clinicians, police officers, FBI agents, politicians, teachers, mothers, fa-thers, and spouses—are no better than chance (fifty-fifty) when it comes to detecting deception (Ford, 1996, 217, Ekman, 1991, 162). It is disturb-ing but true. Most people, including professionals, do no better than a coin toss at correctly perceiving dishonesty (Ekman & O’Sullivan, 1991, 

Page 222:
208 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
913–920). Even those who are truly gifted at detecting deception (proba-
bly less than 1 percent of the general population) seldom are right more than 60 percent of the time. Consider the countless jurors who must de-termine honesty or dishonesty, guilt or innocence, based on what they think are deceptive behaviors. Unfortunately, those behaviors most often mistaken for dishonesty are primarily manifestations of stress, not decep-tion (Ekman, 1991, 187–188). That’s why I live by the motto taught to me by those who know that there is no single behavior that is indicative of deception—not one (Ekman, 1991, 162–189).
This does not mean that we should abandon our efforts to study de-
ception and observe for behaviors that, in context, are suggestive of it. My advice is to set a realistic goal: to be able to read nonverbal behaviors with clarity and reliability, and let the human body speak to you as to what it is thinking, feeling, or intending. These are more reasonable objectives that, in the end, will not only help you understand others more effec-tively (lying isn’t the only behavior worth detecting!), but will also give you clues to deception as a byproduct of your observations.
What Makes Deception So Difficult to Detect?
If you’re wondering why identifying deception is so difficult, consider 
the old adage “Practice makes perfect.” We learn to lie at such an early a g e—an d w e d o i t so o ft e n—tha t w e bec o m e s k illful a t t e ll in g f al se -hoods convincingly. T o illustrate, think of how often you have heard something like, “T ell them we are not home,” or “Put on a party smile,” or “Don’t tell your dad what happened or we’ll both be in trouble.” Be-cause we are social animals, we not only lie for our own benefit, but we lie for the benefit of each other (Vrij, 2003, 3–11). Lying can be a way to avoid giving a lengthy explanation, an attempt to avoid punishment, a shortcut to a bogus doctoral degree, or it can simply be used to be nice. Even our cosmetics and padded clothing help us to deceive. In essence, for us humans, lying is a “tool for social survival” (St-Yves, 2007).

Page 223:
DETECTING DECEPTION  209
A NEW APPROACH TO UNCOVERING DECEPTION
During my last year at the FBI, I submitted my research and findings on 
deception, including a review of the literature for the previous forty years. This led to the FBI publication of an article entitled “ A Four-Do-main Model of Detecting Deception: An Alternative Paradigm for Inter-viewing” (Navarro, 2003, 19–24). This paper presented a new model for identifying dishonesty based on the concept of limbic arousal and our displays of comfort and discomfort, or the comfort/discomfort domain . Sim-
ply put, I suggested that when we are telling the truth and have no wor-ries, we tend to be more comfortable than when we are lying or concerned about getting caught because we harbor “guilty knowledge.” The model also shows how we tend to display more emphatic behaviors when we are comfortable and truthful, and when we are uncomfortable, we don’t.
This model is currently being used worldwide. Although its purpose 
was to train law enforcement officers to detect deception during criminal investigations, it is applicable to any type of interpersonal interaction—at work, at home, or anywhere in which differentiating dishonesty from truth is important. As I present it to you here, you’ll be uniquely pre-pared to understand it because of what you have learned in previous chapters.
The Critical Role of the Comfort/Discomfort Equation 
in Detecting Deception
Those who are lying or are guilty and must carry the knowledge of their 
l i e s  a n d / o r  c r i m e s  w i t h  t h e m  fi n d  i t  d i f fi c u l t  t o  a c h i e v e  c o m f o r t ,  a n d  their tension and distress may be readily observed. Attempting to dis-guise their guilt or deception places a very distressing cognitive load on them as they struggle to fabricate answers to what would otherwise be simple questions (DePaulo et al., 1985, 323–370).
The more comfortable a person is when speaking with us, the easier 
it will be to detect the critical non v erbals of discomfort associated with 

Page 224:
210 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
deception. Your goal is to establish high comfort during the early part of 
any interaction or during “rapport building.” This helps you to establish a baseline of behaviors during that period when the person, hopefully, does not feel threatened.
Establishing a Comfort Zone for Detecting Deception
In pursuing the detection of deception, you must realize your impact on 
the actions of a suspected liar, and recognize that how you behave will affect the other person’s behavior (Ekman, 1991, 170–173). How you ask the questions (accusingly), how you sit (too close), how you look upon the person (suspiciously), will either support or disrupt their comfort level. It is well established that if you violate people’s space, if you act suspicious, if you look at them the wrong way, or ask questions with a prosecutorial tone, it negatively intrudes on the interview. First and foremost, unmask-ing liars is not about identifying dishonesty, but rather it is about how you observe and question others in order to detect deception. Then, it is about the collection of nonverbal intelligence. The more you see (clusters of behavior), the more confidence you can have in your observations, and the greater your chances for perceiving when someone is being untruth-ful.
Even if you are actively looking for deception during a discussion or 
interview , your role should be neutral , to the extent possible, not suspi-
cious. Remember that the moment you become suspicious, you are af-fecting how a person will respond to you. If you say, “You are lying” or “I think you are not telling the truth,” or even simply look at him or her suspiciously, you will influence the person’s behaviors (Vrij, 2003, 67). The best way to proceed is just to ask for ever-more clarifying details about the matter, such as a simple “I don’t understand” or “Can you ex-plain how that happened again?” Often merely getting someone to ex-pand on his or her statement will suffice in eventually sorting deceit from truth. Whether you are attempting to ascertain the validity of someone’s credentials during an employment interview, the truth about a theft at work, or especially if you are engaged in a serious discussion 

Page 225:
DETECTING DECEPTION  211
regarding finances or potential infidelity with your spouse, keeping your 
cool is essential. Try to remain calm as you ask questions, don’t act suspi-cious, and appear comfortable and nonjudgmental. That way the person you are speaking with will be less likely to be defensive and/or unwilling to divulge information.
Defining Signs of Comfort
Comfort is readily apparent in conversations with family and friends. We 
sense when people are having a good time and are comfortable in our presence. While seated at a table, people who are comfortable with each other will move objects aside so that nothing blocks their view. Over time, they ma y dra w closer so they do not ha v e to talk as loudly . Indi-viduals who are comfortable display their bodies more openly, showing more of their torsos and the insides of their arms and legs (they allow ventral access or fronting). In the presence of strangers, comfort is more difficult to achieve, especially in stressful situations such as a formal in-terview or a deposition. That is why it’s so important that you do your best to create a comfort zone from the very outset of your interaction with another individual.
When we are comfortable, there should be synchrony  in our nonver-
bal behavior. The breathing rhythm of two comfortable people will be similar, as will the tone and pitch of their speech and their general de-meanor. Just think of a couple leaning toward each other at a café as they sit in full comfort. If one leans forward, the other follows, the phenome-non known as isopraxism. If a person is standing while talking to us, leaning to the side with hands in the pockets and feet crossed, most likely we will do the same (see figure 87). By mirroring another person’s behav-ior, we are subconsciously saying, “I am comfortable with you.”
In an interview setting or any situation where a difficult topic is being 
discussed, the tone of each party should mirror the other over time if there is synchrony (Cialdini, 1993, 167–207). If harmony does not exist between the people involved, this synchrony will be missing and discern-ible. They may sit differently, talk in a manner or tone different from 

Page 226:
212 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
each other, or at the least their expressions will be at odds, if not totally 
disparate. Asynchrony is a barrier to effective communication and is a serious obstacle to a successful interview or discussion.
If you are relaxed and poised during a conversation or interview, 
while the other party continually looks at the clock or sits in a way that is tense or lacks movement (referred to as flash frozen ) ,  t h i s  i s  s u g g e s t i v e  
that there is no comfort, even though to the untrained eye it may appear that everything is all right (Knapp & Hall, 2002, 321; Schafer & Navarro, 2004, 66). If the other person seeks disruptions or talks repeatedly of fi-nalizing the conversation, these too are signs of discomfort.
Obviously, displays of comfort are more common in people speaking Here is an example of isopraxis: Both people are 
mirroring each other and leaning toward each other, showing signs of high comfort.
Fig. 87

Page 227:
DETECTING DECEPTION  213
the truth; there is no stress to conceal, and no guilty knowledge to make 
them uncomfortable (Ekman, 1991, 185). Thus, you should be looking for signs of discomfort—when they occur and in what context—to assess for possible deception.
Signs of Discomfort in an Interaction
We show discomfort when we do not like what is happening to us, when 
we do not like what we are seeing or hearing, or when we are compelled to talk about things we would prefer to keep hidden. We display discom-fort first in our physiology, due to arousal of the limbic brain. Our heart rate quickens, our hairs stand on end, we perspire more, and we breathe faster. Beyond the physiological responses, which are autonomic (auto-matic) and require no thinking on our part, our bodies manifest discom-fort nonverbally. We tend to move our bodies in an attempt to block or distance, we rearrange ourselves, jiggle our feet, fidget, twist at the hips, or drum our fingers when we are scared, nervous, or significantly un-comfortable (de Becker, 1997, 133). We have all noticed such discomfort behaviors in others—whether at a job interview, on a date, or when be-ing questioned about a serious matter at work or home. Remember that these actions do not automatically indicate deception; however, they do indicate that a person is uncomfortable in the current situation for any number of reasons.
If you are attempting to observe discomfort as a potential indicator 
of deception, the best setting is one that has no objects (such as furni-ture, tables, desks, or chairs) between you and the person you are ob-serving or interviewing. Because we have noted that the lower limbs are particularly honest, if the person is behind a desk or table, try to move it or convene away from it, as such an obstacle will block the vast m a j o r i t y  ( n e a r l y  8 0  p e r c e n t )  o f  t h e  b o d y  s u r f a c e s  t h a t  s h o u l d  b e  o b -served. In fact, watch for liars to use obstacles or objects (such as a pil-low, a drinking glass, or a chair) to form a barrier between you and them (see box 57). The use of objects is a sign that an individual wants distance, separation, and partial concealment, because he or she is be-

Page 228:
214 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
ing less open—which goes hand in hand with being uncomfortable or 
even deceitful.
Incidentally, when it comes to interviewing, or any conversation in 
which you are interested in ascertaining the truth or genuineness of a person’s statements, you may gain more nonverbal information if you are standing; you can pick up on a lot of behaviors standing that simply go unnoticed while sitting. While a lengthy period of standing may be im-practical or unnatural in some settings, such as at a formal job interview, there are often still opportunities to observe standing behaviors, such as when greeting or conversing while waiting for a table at lunch.
When we are uncomfortable with those around us, we tend to dis-
tance ourselves from them. This is especially true of individuals trying to deceive us. Even while sitting side by side, we will lean away from those with whom we feel uncomfortable, often moving either our torsos or our feet away or toward an exit. These behaviors can occur during c o n v e r s a t i o n s  e i t h e r  b e c a u s e  o f  t h e  d i f fi c u l t ,  u n n e r v i n g ,  o r  s o u r  r e l a -tionship between the parties involved or because of the subject matter being discussed.BOX 57:  BUILDING THE WALL
In my role with the FBI years ago, I conducted a joint interview of a sub-
ject along with an officer from a fellow law enforcement agency. During the interview, a very uncomfortable and dishonest man gradually built a barrier in front of himself using soda cans, pencil holders, and various documents that were on the desk of my interviewing partner. He ulti-mately planted a backpack on the table between himself and the inter-
viewers. The building of this barrier was so gradual that we did not realize it until we later looked at the video. This nonverbal behavior occurred because the subject was attempting to derive comfort by hiding behind a wall of materials, thus distancing himself. Obviously, we got little informa-
tion or cooperation, and for the most part, he lied.

Page 229:
DETECTING DECEPTION  215
Other clear signs of discomfort seen in people during a difficult or 
troubling conversation include rubbing the forehead near the temple re-gion, squeezing the face, rubbing the neck, or stroking the back of the head with the hand. People may show their displeasure by rolling their eyes in disrespect, picking lint off themselves (preening), or talking down to the person asking the questions—giving short answers, becoming re-sistant, hostile, or sarcastic, or even displaying microgestures with inde-cent connotations such as giving the finger (Ekman, 1991, 101–103). Envision a snotty and indignant teenager who is being questioned about a new and expensive sweater her mother suspects was stolen from the mall and you’ll have a clear idea of all the defensive maneuvers an un-comfortable person can display.
When making false statements, liars will rarely touch or engage in 
other physical contact with you. I found this to be particularly true of in-formants who had gone bad and were giving false information for money. Since touching is more often performed by the truthful person for empha-sis, this distancing helps to alleviate the level of anxiety a dishonest person i s f ee l in g . An y d imin u ti o n o f t o u c hin g o bse rv e d in a pe r so n e n g a g e d in conversation, especially while hearing or answering critical questions, is more likely than not to be indicative of deception (Lieberman, 1998, 24). If possible and appropriate, you may consider sitting close to a loved one when questioning him or her about something serious, or even holding your child’s hand while you discuss a difficult matter. In this way you may more readily note changes in touch throughout the conversation.
A failure to touch does not automatically indicate someone is decep-
tive, however, and physical contact is clearly more appropriate and ex-pected in some of our interpersonal relationships than others. It is true that a lack of touch may signify that someone does not like you, since we also don’t touch those we don’t respect or for whom we have contempt. The bottom line is that assessing the nature and length of the relationship is also important in discerning the meaning of such distancing behavior.
When looking at the face for signs of comfort or discomfort, look for 
subtle behaviors such as a grimace or a look of contempt (Ekman, 1991, 158–169). Also watch for a person’s mouth to quiver or squirm in dis-

Page 230:
216 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
comfort during a serious discussion. Any facial expression that lasts too 
long or lingers is not normal, whether a smile, a frown, or a surprised look. Such contrived behavior during a conversation or an interview is intended to influence opinion and lacks authenticity. Often when people are caught doing something wrong or lying, they will hold a smile for what seems an eternity. Rather than indicating comfort, this type of false smile is actually a discomfort display.
When we do not like something we hear, whether a question or an 
answer, we often close our eyes as if to block out what was just heard. The various forms of eye-blocking mechanisms are analogous to folding our hands tightly across our chest or turning away from those with whom we disagree. These blocking displays are performed subcon-sciously and occur often, especially during a formal interview, and are usually related to a specific topic. Eyelid flutter is also observed at times when a particular subject causes distress (Navarro & Schafer, 2001, 10).
All of these eye manifestations are powerful clues as to how informa-
tion is registering or what questions are problematic for the recipient. However, they are not necessarily direct indicators of deceit. Little or no eye contact is not indicative of deception (Vrij, 2003, 38–39). This is rub-
bish for reasons discussed in the previous chapter.
Keep in mind that predators and habitual liars actually engage in 
greater eye contact than most individuals, and will lock eyes with you. Research clearly shows that Machiavellian people (for example, psycho-paths, con men, and habitual liars) will actually increase eye contact dur-ing deception (Ekman, 1991, 141–142). Perhaps this increase in eye contact i s co nsci o us l y e m p l o y ed b y s u c h in di v i d ual s beca use i t i s so co mm o nl y (but erroneously) believed that looking someone straight in the eye is a sign of truthfulness.
Be aware that there are cultural differences in eye contact and eye-
gaze behavior that must be considered in any attempt to detect decep-tion. For example, individuals belonging to certain groups of people (African Americans and Latin Americans, for instance) may be taught to look down or away from parental authority out of respect when ques-tioned or being scolded (Johnson, 2007, 280–281).

Page 231:
DETECTING DECEPTION  217
Take note of the head movements of those with whom you are 
speaking. If a person’s head begins to shake either in the affirmative or in the negative as he is speaking, and the movement occurs simultane-ously with what he is saying, then the statement can typically be relied upon as being truthful. If, however, the head shake or head movement is delayed or occurs after the speech, then most likely the statement is con-trived and not truthful. Although it may be very subtle, the delayed movement of the head is an attempt to further validate what has been stated and is not part of the natural flow of communication. In addi-tion, honest head movements should be consistent with verbal denials or affirmations. If a head mov ement is inconsistent with or contrary to a person’s statement, it may indicate deception. While typically involving more subtle than exaggerated head movements, this incongruity of ver-bal and nonverbal signals happens more often than we think. For ex-ample, someone may say, “I didn’t do it,” while his head is slightly nodding in the affirmative.
During discomfort, the limbic brain takes over, and a person’s face 
can conversely either flush or lighten in color. During difficult conversa-tions, you may also see increased perspiration or breathing; note whether the person is noticeably wiping off sweat or trying to control his or her breathing in an effort to remain calm. Any trembling of the body, whether of the hands, fingers, or lips, or any attempt to hide or restrain the hands or lips (through disappearing or compressed lips), may be in-dicative of discomfort and/or deception, especially if it occurs after nor -mal nervousness should have worn off.
A person’s voice may crack or may seem inconsistent during deceptive 
speech; swallowing becomes difficult as the throat becomes dry from stress, so look for hard swallows. These can be evidenced by a sudden bob or jump of the Adam’s apple and may be accompanied by the clear-ing or repeated clearings of the throat—all indicative of discomfort. Keep in mind that these behaviors are indicators of distress, not guaran-tees of deception. I have seen very honest people testify in court display-ing all these behaviors simply because they were nervous, not because they were lying. Even after years of testifying in federal and state courts, 

Page 232:
218 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
I still get nervous when I am on the stand, so signs of tension and stress 
always need to be deciphered in context.
Pacifiers and Discomfort
When interviewing suspects during my years with the FBI, I looked for 
pacifying behaviors to help guide me in my questioning and to assess what was particularly stressful to the interviewee. Although pacifiers alone are not definitive proof of deception (since they can manifest in in-nocent people who are nervous), they do provide another piece of the puzzle in determining what a person is truly thinking and feeling.
The following is a list of twelve things I do—and the points I keep in 
mind—when I want to read pacifying nonverbals in interpersonal inter-actions. You might consider using a similar strategy when you interview or converse with others, be it a formal inquiry, a serious conversation with a family member, or an interaction with a business associate.
(1) Get a clear view. When I conduct interviews or interact with 
others, I don’t want anything blocking my total view of the person, as I don’t want to miss any pacifying behaviors. If, for example, the person pacifies by wiping his hands on his lap, I want to be able to see it—which is difficult if there is a desk in the way. Human resource personnel should be aware that the best way to interview is in a physically open space—with noth-ing blocking your view of the candidate—so you may fully observe the person you are interviewing.
(2) Expect some pacifying behaviors. A certain level of pacifying 
behavior is normal in everyday nonverbal displays; people do this to calm themselves. When my daughter was young, she would soothe herself to sleep by playing with her hair, curling the strands in her fingers, seemingly oblivious to the world. So I ex-pect people to pacify more or less, throughout the day , just as I expect them to breathe, as they adapt to an ever-changing envi-ronment.

Page 233:
DETECTING DECEPTION  219
(3) Expect initial nervousness. Initial nervousness in an interview 
or serious conversation is normal, particularly when circum-stances surrounding the meeting are stressful. For example, a father asking his son about his homework assignment will not be as stressful as asking the boy why he was expelled from school for disruptive behavior.
(4) Get the person with whom you’re interacting to relax first. As an 
interview, important meeting, or significant discussion progresses, e v en tuall y those in v ol v ed s houl d calm do wn an d becom e m o r e comfortable. In fact, a good interviewer will make sure this hap-pens by taking time to let the person become more relaxed before asking questions or exploring topics that might be stressful.
(5) Establish a baseline. Once a person’s pacifying behaviors have 
decreased and stabilized to normal (for that person), the inter-viewer can use that pacifying level as a baseline for assessing future behavior.
(6) Look for increased use of pacifiers. As the interview or conver-
sation continues, you should be observant of pacifying behav-iors and/or an increase (spike) in their frequency, particularly when they occur in response to a specific question or piece of inf ormation. Such an increase is a cl ue that something about the question or information has troubled the person pacifying, and that topic likely deserves further attention and focus. It is important to identify correctly the specific stimulus (whether a question, information, or event) that caused the pacifying re-sponse; otherwise you might draw the wrong conclusions or move the discussion in the wrong direction. For example, if during an employment interview the candidate starts to venti-late his shirt collar (a pacifier) when asked a certain question about his former position, that specific inquiry has caused suf-ficient stress that his brain is requiring pacification. This indi-cates the issue needs to be pursued further. The behavior does not necessarily mean that deception is involved, but simply that the topic is causing the interviewee stress.

Page 234:
220 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
(7) Ask, pause, and observe. Good interviewers, like good con-
versationalists, do not machine gun questions by firing one right after the other in a staccato fashion. You will be hard-pressed to detect deception accurately if your impatience or impertinence antagonizes the person with whom you are speaking. Ask a question and then wait to observe all the re-actions. Give the interviewee time to think and respond, and build in pregnant pauses to achieve this objective. Also, ques-tions should be crafted in such a way as to elicit specific an-swers in order to better zero in on facts and fiction. The more specific the question, the more likely you are to elicit precise nonverbals, and now that you have better understanding of the meaning of subconscious actions, the more accurate your assessments will be. In law enforcement interviews, unfortu-nately, many false confessions have been obtained through sustained staccato-like questioning, which causes high stress and obfuscates nonverbal cues. We now know that innocent people will confess to crimes, and even give written state-ments, in order to terminate a stressful interview wherein pressure is applied (Kassin, 2006, 207–228). The same holds true for sons, daughters, spouses, friends, and employees when grilled by an overzealous person, be it a parent, husband, wife, companion, or boss.
(8) Keep the person you are interviewing focused. Interviewers 
should k eep in mind that man y times when people are sim ply talking—when they are telling their side of the story—there will be fewer useful nonverbals performed than when the interviewer controls the scope of the topic. Pointed questions elicit behavioral manifestations that are useful in assessing a person’s honesty.
(9) Chatter is not truth. One mistake made by both novice and 
experienced interviewers is the tendency to equate talking with truth. When interviewees are talking, we tend to believe them; when they are reserved, we assume they are lying. Dur-ing conversation, people who provide an overwhelming 

Page 235:
DETECTING DECEPTION  221
amount of information and detail about an event or situation 
may appear to be telling the truth; however, they may be pre-senting a fabricated smoke screen they hope will obfuscate the facts or lead the conversation in another direction. The truth is revealed not in the volume  of material spoken but through the 
verification of facts  provided by the speaker. Until the infor-
mation is verified, it is self-reported and perhaps meaningless data (see box 58).
(10) Stress coming in and going out. Based on years of studying in-
terviewee behavior, I have concluded that a person with guilty knowledge will present two distinct behavior patterns, in se-quence, when asked a difficult question such as, “Did you ever go inside the home of Mr. Jones?” The first behavior will re-BOX 58:  IT’S ALL A LIE
I remember one case in which I interviewed a woman in Macon, Georgia. 
For three days she voluntarily provided us with page after page of infor-mation. I really felt we were on to something when the interview was fi-nally over, until it came time to corroborate what this woman had said. For over a year we investigated her claims (both in the United States and in Europe), but in the end, after expending significant effort and resources, 
we discovered that everything she had told us was a lie. She had provided us pages and pages of plausible lies, even implicating her innocent hus-band. Had I remembered that cooperation does not always equal truth, and had I scrutinized her more carefully, we would have been spared 
wasting a great deal of time and money. The information this woman had given sounded good and seemed plausible, but it was all trash. I wish I could say this incident happened to me early in my career, but it did not. I am neither the first—nor will I be the last—interviewer to be bamboozled this way. Though some people naturally talk more than others, you should always be on the lookout for this kind of chatty ploy.

Page 236:
222 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
flect the stress experienced when hearing the question. The 
interviewee will subconsciously respond with various distanc-ing behaviors including foot withdrawal (moving them away from the investigator); he may lean away or may tighten his jaw and lips. This will be followed by the second set of related behaviors, pacifying responses to the stress that may include signals such as neck touching, nose stroking, or neck massag-ing as he ponders the question or answer.
(11) Isolate the cause of the stress. T wo behavior patterns in se-
ries—the stress indicators followed by pacifying behaviors—have traditionally been erroneously associated with deception. This is unfortunate, because these manifestations need to be explained more simply as what they are—indicators of stress and stress relief—not necessarily dishonesty. No doubt some-one who is lying may display these same behaviors, but indi-viduals who are nervous also show them. Occasionally I will hear someone say, “If people talk while touching their nose, they are lying.” It may be true that people who are deceptive touch their nose while speaking, but so do individuals who are honest but under stress. The nose touching is a pacifying behavior to relieve internal tension—regardless of the source of that discomfort. Even a retired FBI agent who is stopped for speeding with no legitimate explanation will touch his nose when pulled over (yes, I paid the ticket). My point is this. Don’t be so hasty to assume deception when you see someone touching his or her nose. For everyone who does it while ly-ing, you will find a hundred who do it out of habit to relieve stress.
(12) Pacifiers say so much. By helping us identify when a person is 
stressed, pacifying behaviors help us identify issues that need further focus and exploration. Through effective questioning we can both elicit and identify these pacifiers in any interper-
sonal interaction to achieve a better understanding of a person’s thoughts and intentions.

Page 237:
DETECTING DECEPTION  223
TWO PRINCIPAL NONVERBAL BEHAVIORAL PATTERNS 
TO CONSIDER IN DETECTING DECEPTION
When it comes to body signals that alert us to the possibility of decep-
tion, you should be watching for nonverbal behaviors involving syn-chrony and emphasis.
Synchrony
Earlier in this chapter, I discussed the importance of synchrony as a way 
to assess for comfort in interpersonal interaction. Synchrony is also im-portant, however, in assessing for deception. Look for synchrony between what is being said verbally and nonverbally, between the circumstances of the moment and what the subject is saying, between events and emo-tions, and even synchrony of time and space.
When being questioned, a person answering in the affirmative should 
have congruent head movement that immediately supports what is said; it should not be delayed. Lack of synchrony is exhibited when a person states, “I did not do it,” while her head is nodding in an affirmative mo-tion. Likewise, asynchrony is demonstrated when a man is asked, “Would you lie about this?” and his head gives a slight nod while he answers, “ N o . ”  U p o n  c a t c h i n g  t h e m s e l v e s  i n  t h i s  f a u x  p a s ,  p e o p l e  w i l l  r e v e r s e  their head movements in an attempt to do damage control. When asyn-chronous behavior is observed, it looks contrived and pathetic. More of-ten a mendacious statement, such as an untruthful “I did not do it,” is followed by a noticeably delayed and less emphatic negative head move-ment. These behaviors are not synchronous and therefore more likely to be equated with deception because they show discomfort in their pro-duction.
There should also be synchrony between what is being said and the 
events of the moment. For instance, when parents are reporting the al-leged kidnapping of their infant, there should be synchrony between the event (kidnapping) and their emotions. The distraught mother and fa-ther should be clamoring for law enforcement assistance, emphasizing 

Page 238:
224 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
every detail, feeling the depths of despair, eager to help, and willing to 
tell and retell the story, even at personal risk. When such reports are made by placid individuals, more concerned with getting one particular version of the story out and lacking in consistent emotional displays, or who are more concerned about their own well-being and how they are p e r c e i v e d ,  i t  i s  b e h a v i o r  t h a t  i s  t o t a l l y  o u t  o f  s y n c h r o n y  w i t h  c i r c u m -stances and inconsistent with honesty.
Lastly, there should be synchrony between events, time, and place. A 
person who delays reporting a significant event, such as the drowning of a friend, spouse, or child, or who travels to another jurisdiction to report the event should rightfully come under suspicion. Furthermore, the re-porting of ev ents that w ould ha v e been im possible to observ e from the person’s vantage point is asynchronous, and therefore suspect. People who lie do not consider how synchrony fits into the equation, and their nonverbals and stories will eventually fail them. Achieving synchrony is a form of comfort and, as we hav e seen, plays a major role during police interviews and the reporting of crimes; but it will also set the stage for successful and meaningful conversations about all manner of serious is-sues in which detecting deceit is important.
Emphasis
When we speak, we naturally utilize various parts of our body—such as 
the eyebrows, head, hands, arms, torso, legs, and feet—to emphasize a point about which we feel deeply or emotionally. Observing emphasis is important because emphasis is universal when people are being genuine. Emphasis is the limbic brain’s contribution to communication, a way to let others know just how potently we feel. Conversely, when the limbic brain does not back up what we say, we emphasize less or not at all. For the most part, in my experience and that of others, liars do not empha-size (Lieberman, 1998, 37). Liars will engage their cognitive brains in order to decide what to say and how to deceive, but rarely do they think about the presentation of the lie. When compelled to lie, most people are n ot a w ar e o f h o w m uch em p has is o r a ccen tua ti o n en t e rs in t o e v e ry da y 

Page 239:
DETECTING DECEPTION  225
conversations. When liars attempt to fabricate an answer, their emphasis 
looks unnatural or is delayed; rarely do they emphasize where appropri-ate, or they choose to do so only on relatively unimportant matters.
We emphasize both verbally and nonverbally. Verbally, we emphasize 
through voice, pitch, or tone, or through repetition. We also emphasize nonverbally, and these behaviors can be even more accurate and useful than words when attempting to detect the truth or dishonesty in a con-versation or interview. People who typically use their hands while speak-ing punctuate their remarks with hand gestures, even going so far as pounding on a desk as they emphasize. Other individuals accentuate with the tips of the fingers by either gesturing with them or touching things. Hand behaviors complement honest speech, thoughts, and true sentiments (Knapp & Hall, 2002, 277–284). Raising our eyebrows (eye-brow flash) and widening our eyes are also ways of emphasizing a point (Morris, 1985, 61; Knapp & Hall, 2002, 68).
Another manifestation of emphasis is seen when someone leans for-
ward with the torso, showing interest. We employ gravity-defying ges-tures such as rising up on the balls of our feet when we make a significant or emotionally charged point. When seated, people emphasize by raising the knee (staccato-like) while highlighting important points, and added emphasis can be shown by slapping the knee as it comes up, indicating emotional exuberance. Gravity-defying gestures are emblematic of em-phasis and true sentiment, something liars rarely display.
I n  c o n t r a s t ,  p e o p l e  d e - e m p h a s i z e  o r  s h o w  l a c k  o f  c o m m i t m e n t  t o  
their own speech by speaking behind their hands (talking while covering their mouths) or showing limited facial expression. People control their countenance and engage in other movement restriction and withdrawal behaviors when they are not committed to what they are saying (Knapp & Hall, 2002, 320; Lieberman, 1998, 37). Deceptive people often show deliberative, pensive displays, such as fingers to the chin or stroking of cheeks, as though they are still thinking about what to say; this is in stark contrast to honest people who emphasize the point they are making. De-ceptive people spend time evaluating what they say and how it is being received, which is inconsistent with honest behavior.

Page 240:
226 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
SPECIFIC NONVERBAL BEHAVIORS TO 
CONSIDER IN DETECTING DECEPTION
Below are some specific things you’ll want to watch for when examining 
emphasis as a means for detecting possible deception.
Lack of Emphasis in Hand Behaviors
As Aldert Vrij and others have reported, lack of arm movement and lack 
of emphasis are suggestive of deception. The problem is there is no way of measuring this, especially in a public or social setting. Nevertheless, strive to note when it occurs and in what context, especially if it comes after a significant topic is brought up (Vrij, 2003, 25–27). Any sudden change in movement reflects brain activity. When arms shift from being animated to being still, there must be a reason, be it dejection or (possi-bly) deception.
In my own interviewing experiences, I have noticed that liars will 
tend to display less steepling. I also look for the white knuckles of the individual who grabs the chair armrest in a fixed manner as though in an “ejector seat.” Unfortunately, for this uncomfortable person, ejection from the discussion is often impossible. Many criminal investigators have found that when the head, neck, arms, and legs are held in place with little movement and the hands and arms are clutching the armrest, such behavior is very much consistent with those who are about to de-ceive, but again, it is not definitive (Schafer & Navarro, 2003, 66) (see figure 88).
Interestingly, as individuals make declarative statements that are false, 
they will avoid touching not only other people, but objects such as a po-dium or table as well. I have never seen or heard a person who is lying y ell affirmati v el y , “I didn ’ t do it, ” while pounding his fist on the table. Usually what I have seen are very weak, nonemphatic statements, with gestures that are equally mild. People who are being deceptive lack com-mitment and confidence in what they are saying. Although their think-ing brain (neocortex) will decide what to say in order to mislead, their 

Page 241:
DETECTING DECEPTION  227
emotive brain (the limbic system—the honest part of the brain) simply 
will not be committed to the ruse, and therefore will not emphasize their statements using nonverbal behaviors (such as gestures). The sentiments of the limbic brain are hard to override. Try to smile fully at someone you dislike. It is extremely difficult to do. As with a false or fake smile, false statements come with weak or passive nonverbals.
The Rogatory Position
When a person places his outstretched arms in front of his body, with 
palms up, this is known as the rogatory  (or “prayerful”) display (see figure 
89). Those who worship will turn their palms up to God to ask for mercy. Likewise, captured soldiers will turn up their palms as they ap-Sitting for long periods in a chair, as though 
flash frozen in an ejector seat, is evidence of high stress and discomfort.
Fig. 88

Page 242:
228 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
p r oa ch th e ir ca pt o rs. This beha vi o r is also seen in in di vi d uals w h o sa y 
something when they want you to believe them. During a discussion, observe the person with whom you are speaking. When she makes a declarative statement, note whether her hands are palm up or palm down. During regular conversation in which ideas are being discussed and neither party is vehemently committed to a particular point, I expect to see both palm-up and palm-down displays.
However, when a person is making a passionate and assertive decla-
ration such as, “You have to believe me, I did not kill her,” those hands should be face down (see figure 90). If the statement is made palms up, the individual supplicating to be believed, I would find such a statement highly suspect. While this is not definitive, I would question any declara-tive statement made with the palms up. The palm-up position is not very affirmative and suggests that the person is asking to be believed. The The palms-up or “rogatory” position usually indicates the 
person wants to be believed or wants to be accepted. It is not a dominant, confident display.
Fig. 89

Page 243:
DETECTING DECEPTION  229
truthful don’t have to plead to be believed; they make a statement and it 
stands.
Territorial Displays and Deception
When w e are confiden t and comf ortable, w e spread out. When w e are 
less secure, we tend to take up less space. In extreme circumstances, dis-tressed people may fold their arms and legs into their own body, assum-ing an almost fetal position. Uncomfortable conversations and interviews can evoke a variety of withdrawn postures: arms that are intertwined like a pretzel and/or ankles that are locked in place, sometimes to the point of being almost painful to the observer. Look especially for dramatic changes in body position that could be indicative of deception, particularly when they occur concurrently with a specific change of topic.Statements made palm down are more emphatic and 
more confident than statements made with hands palm up in the rogatory position.
Fig. 90

Page 244:
230 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
When we are confident about what we believe or what we are saying, 
we tend to sit up, with shoulders and back wide, exhibiting an erect pos-ture indicative of security. When people are being deceitful or are out-right lying, they subconsciously tend to stoop or sink into the furniture as if they are attempting to escape what is being said—even if they, them-selves, are saying it. Those who are insecure, or are unsure of themselves, their thoughts, or their beliefs, are likely to reflect this in their posture—usually by stooping slightly, but sometimes dramatically by lowering their heads and drawing the shoulders up to the ears. Look for this “turtle effect” whenever people are uncomfortable and are trying to hide in the open. It is definitely a display of insecurity and discomfort.
Shoulder Shrugs
Although we all shrug at one time or another when we are not sure of 
something, liars will give a modified shrug when they are unsure of themselv es. The liar’ s shrug is abnormal in that it is abridged and cus-tomized because the person manifesting it is not fully committed to what is being expressed. If only one shoulder comes up, or if the shoul-ders rise nearly to the ears and the person’s head seems to disappear, it is a sign of high discomfort and sometimes seen in an individual preparing to answer a question deceptively.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
As I stated at the beginning of the chapter, the research over the last twenty years is unequivocal. There are no nonverbal behaviors that, in and of themselves, are clearly indicative of deception (Ekman, 1991, 98; Ford, 1996, 217). As my friend and researcher Dr. Mark G. Frank re-peatedly has told me, “Joe, unfortunately, there is no ‘Pinocchio effect,’ w h en i t com es t o d ece pti on ” (F rank, 2006) . W i th tha t I m us t h um bl y concur . Theref ore, in or der to sort fact from fiction, our onl y realistic recourse is to rely on those behaviors indicative of comfort/ discomfort, 

Page 245:
DETECTING DECEPTION  231
synchrony, and emphasis to guide us. They are a guide or paradigm, 
and that is all.
A person who is not comfortable, not emphasizing, and whose com-
munication is out of synchrony is, at best, communicating poorly or, at worst, being deceptive. Discomfort may originate from many sources, including antipathy between those involved in the discussion, the setting in which the conversation is held, or nervousness during an interview process. It can also, obviously, be a result of culpability, guilty knowledge, having to hide information, or plain lying. The possibilities are many, but now that you know how better to question others, recognize their signs of discomfort, and the importance of putting their behaviors into con-text, at least you have a starting point. Only further inquiry, observation, and corroboration can assure us of veracity. There is no way we can pre-vent people from lying to us, but at least we can be on guard when they attempt to deceive us.
Last, be careful not to label someone a liar with limited information 
or based on one observation. Many good relationships have been ruined this way. Remember, when it comes to detecting deception, even the best experts, including myself, are only a blink away from chance, and have a fifty-fifty probability of being right or wrong. Plainly put, that’s just not good enough!

Page 246:


Page 247:
NINE
Some Final Thoughts
 A friend recently told me a story that speaks to the theme of this book 
and, incidentally, can save you significant hassles if you’re ever try-ing to find an address in Coral Gables, Florida. This friend was 
driving her daughter to a photo shoot in Coral Gables, several hours from their home in Tampa. Because she had never been to Coral Gables before, she checked a map to determine the best route to follow. All went well un-til she arrived in town and started looking for street signs. There were none. She drove for twenty minutes through unmarked intersections, no signs in sight. Finally, in desperation, she stopped at a gas station and asked how anyone knew which street was which. The proprietor wasn’t surprised by her question. “You’re not the first to ask,” he nodded sympathetically. “When you reach the intersection, you need to look down, not up. The street signs are six-inch weathered stone blocks with painted names and they are placed on the ground just off the pavement.” My friend heeded his 

Page 248:
234 W H AT  EVERY BODY  IS SAYING
advice and within minutes located her destination. “Obviously,” she noted, 
“I was looking for street signs six feet or more above the ground, not six inches off the ground. . . .  What was most incredible,” she added, “was once I knew what to look for and where to look, the signs were obvious and unmistakable. I had no trouble finding my way.”
This book is about signs, too. When it comes to human behavior, 
there are basically two kinds of signs, verbal and nonverbal. All of us ha v e been ta ught to look f or and identify the v erbal signs. B y analogy , those are the ones that are located on poles, clearly visible as we drive down the streets of a strange city. Then there are the nonverbal signs, the ones that have always been there but that many of us have not learned to spot because we haven’t been trained to look for and identify signs lo-cated at ground level. What’s interesting is that once we learn to attend to an d r e a d n o n v e r b al s i g n s , o u r r e a c ti o n s w i l l m i r r o r th a t o f m y f r i e n d . “Once I knew what to look for and where to look, the signs were obvious and unmistakable. I had no trouble finding my way.”
It is my hope that through an understanding of nonverbal behavior , 
you will achieve a deeper, more meaningful view of the world around you—able to hear and see the two languages, spoken and silent, that combine to present the full, rich tapestry of human experience in all of its delightful complexity. This is a goal well worth pursuing, and one that with effort I know you can achieve. You now possess something power-ful. You possess knowledge that will enrich your interpersonal relation-ships for the rest of your life. Enjoy knowing what every body  is saying, 
for to that end I have dedicated myself and this book.
Joe Navarro
Tampa, Florida
USA

Page 249:
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders  (4th ed.). Text rev. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Axtell, R. E. (1991). Gestures: The do’s and taboos of body language around the world . 
New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Burgoon, J. K., Buller, D. B., & Woodall, W. G. (1994). Nonverbal communication: The 
unspoken dialogue . Columbus, OH: Greyden Press.
Cialdini, R. B. (1993). Influence: The psychology of persuasion . New York: William Mor-
row and Company, Inc.
Collett, P. (2003). The book of tells: From the bedroom to the boardroom —how to read 
other people . Ontario: HarperCollins Ltd.
Cumming, A. Polygraph use by the Department of Energy: Issues for Congress (Feb-
ruary 14, 2007): www .fas .org/ sgp/ crs/ intel/ RL31988 .pdf .
Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of emotion in man and animals . New York: Appleton-
Century Crofts.
de Becker, G. (1997). The gift of fear . New York: Dell Publishing.
DePaulo, B. M., Stone, J. I., & Lassiter, G. D. (1985). Deceiving and detecting deceit. 
In B. R. Schlenker (Ed.), The self and social life . New York: McGraw-Hill.

Page 250:
Diaz, B. (1988). The conquest of new Spain . New York: Penguin Books.
Dimitrius, J., & Mazzarella, M. (2002). Put your best foot forward: Make a great impres-
sion by taking control of how others see you . New York: Fireside.
——— (1998). Reading people . New York: Ballantine Books.
Ekman, P. (2003). Emotions revealed: Recognizing faces and feelings to improve commu-
nication and emotional life . New York: Times Books.
———  (1991). Telling lies: Clues to deceit in the marketplace, politics, and marriage . New 
York: W. W. Norton & Co.
Ekman, P., & O’Sullivan, M. (1991). Who can catch a liar? American Psychologist 46, 
913–920.
Ford, C. V. (1996). Lies! lies!! lies!!! The psychology of deceit.  Washington, DC: Ameri-
can Psychiatric Press, Inc.
Frank, M. G., et al. (2006). Investigative interviewing and the detection of deception. 
In Tom Williamson (Ed.), Investigative interviewing: Rights, research, regulation . 
Devon, UK: Willian Publishing.
Givens, D. B. (2005). Love signals: A practical guide to the body language of courtship . 
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
——— (1998–2007). The nonverbal dictionary of gestures, signs & body language cues . 
Retrieved 11/18/07 from Spokane Center for Nonverbal Studies Web site: http:// members .aol .com/ nonverbal2/ diction1 .htm.
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence . New York: Bantam Books.
Gregory, D. (1999). Personal conversation with Joe Navarro, FBI HQ, Washing-
ton, DC.
Grossman, D. (1996). On killing: The psychological cost of learning to kill in war and soci-
ety. New York: Back Bay Books.
Hall, E. T. (1969). The hidden dimension . Garden City, NY: Anchor.
Hess, E. H. (1975a). The tell-tale eye: How your eyes reveal hidden thoughts and emotions . 
New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
——— (1975b). The role of pupil size in communication. Scientific American 233, 
110–119.
Johnson, R. R. (2007). Race and police reliance on suspicious non-verbal cues. Polic-
ing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management  20 (2), 277–290.
Kassin, S. M. (2006). A critical appraisal of modern police interrogations. In Tom Wil-
liamson (Ed.), Investigative interviewing: Rights, research, regulation . Devon, UK: 
Willian Publishing.
——— (2004). True or false: “I’d know a false confession if I saw one.” In Pär Anders 
Granhag & Leif A. Strömwall (Eds.), The detection of deception in forensic contexts.  
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Knapp, M. L., & Hall, J. A. (2002). Nonverbal communication in human interaction,  
(5th Ed.). New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.236 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Page 251:
BIBLIOGRAPHY  237
Leakey, R. E., & Lewin, R. (1977). Origins: The emergence and evolution of our species 
and its possible future . New York: E. P. Dutton.
LeDoux, J. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysterious underpinnings of emotional life.  
New York: Touchstone.
Lieberman, D. J. (1998). Never be lied to again . New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Manchester, W. (1978). American Caesar: Douglas MacArthur 1880 –1964.  Boston: Little, 
Brown, & Company.
Morris, D. (1985). Body watching . New York: Crown Publishers.
Murray, E. (2007). Interviewed by Joe Navarro, August 18, Ontario, Canada.Myers, D. G. (1993). Exploring psychology  (2nd ed). New York: Worth Publishers.
Navarro, J. (2007). Psychologie de la communication non verbale. In M. St-Yues & M. 
Tanguay (Eds.), Psychologie de l’enquête criminelle: La recherche de la vérité . Cow-
ansville, Québec: Les Éditions Yvon Blais: 141–163.
——— (2006). Read ’em and reap: A career FBI agent’s guide to decoding poker tells.  
New York: HarperCollins.
——— (2003). A four-domain model of detecting deception. FBI Law Enforcement 
Bulletin  (June), 19–24.
N a v ar r o , J . , & Sc h af e r , J . R. ( 2 00 3 ) .  U ni v e r sal p r in c i p l es o f c r im in al be h a v i o r :  A  
tool for analyzing criminal intent. FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin  (January), 
22–24.
——— (2001). Detecting deception. FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin  (July), 9–13.
Nolte, J. (1999). The human brain: An introduction to its functional anatomy . St. Louis, 
MO: Mosby.
Ost, J. (2006). Recovered memories. In Tom Williamson (Ed.), Investigative  interview-
ing: Rights, research, regulation . Devon, UK: Willian Publishing.
Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and animal emo-
tions . New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.
Prkachin, K. M., & Craig, K. D. (1995). Expressing pain: The communication and in-
t e r p r e t a t i o n  o f  f a c i a l  p a i n  s i g n a l s .  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior 9 (4) , Winter, 
181–205.
Ratey, J. J. (2001). A user’s guide to the brain: Perception, attention, and the four theaters of 
the brain . New York: Pantheon Books.
Schafer, J. R., & Navarro, J. (2004). Advanced interviewing techniques . Springfield, IL: 
Charles C. Thomas Publisher.
Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). Gorillas in our midst: Sustained inattentional 
blindness for dynamic events. Perception 28, 1059–1074.
St-Yves, M., & Tanguay, M. (Eds.) (2007). Psychologie de l’enquête criminelle: La recher-
che de la vérité . Cowansville, Québec: Les Éditions Yvon Blais.
Vrij, A. (2003). Detecting lies and deceit: The psychology of lying and the implications for 
professional practice.  Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Page 252:


Page 253:
INDEX
(page numbers in italics  refer to illustrations)
abrazo,  130–31
adapters, 35adornments
on arms, 128–30body tattoo, 129on torso, 98
affection, arms showing, 130–31aggression, 32–33, 176akimbo display, 120–24, 121, 122, 123
Ali, Muhammad, 103animal heritage, 25–26argument, 33arm-freeze behavior, 112the arms
adornments on, 128–30affection shown with, 130–31akimbo display of, 120–24, 121, 122, 
123
behind the back, 117
courtship behavior of, 125–28crossing, 91, 94
distancing, 119as emotive transmitters, 109–10everyday messages communicated by, 
116
gravity-related movements of, 
110–11
movement cessation of, 113movements of, 115–16restrained, 157restricted movement of, 112–15spread behavior, 125, 126, 127

Page 254:
240 INDEX
the arms ( continued )
territorial displays of, 119–31withdrawal of, 111–12
askance, looking, 184–85, 185
asynchrony, 212authoritative posture, 120–24Axtell, Roger E., 140
barriers, 74, 119
asynchrony as, 212dishonesty building, 214
baseline behaviors, 12–13, 219Basinger, Kim, 79Becker, Gavin de, 36behaviors. See also  foot behavior; 
gravity-defying behaviors; nonverbal behaviors; pacifying behaviors
arm-freeze, 112baseline, 12–13, 219blocking, 31, 73, 74, 119
breathing, 103–4chest-shielding, 93clusters of, 204cultural, 138–39deception, 205–6human brain governing, 50–51isopraxism mirrored, 211limbic system regulating, 24sudden changes in, 13–15
behind the back, arms, 117
“bird” finger, 162blade away, 86–87blanching (shock), 198blocking behaviors, 31
arms used for, 119leg crosses in, 73, 74
blushing, 198body language. See also  nonverbal 
behaviors; nonverbal communications
competent observer of, 7–10deception detected in, xiiifeet/legs observation for, 55–57intention cues from, 16self-administered hug in, 48–49teachers/students communicating 
through, 2
truthfulness of, 4
Bodytalk: The Meaning of Human 
Gestures  (Morris), 140
borderline personality, 129brain. See human brain
brain-scan technology, xiibreathing behavior, 103–4brief touching, eyes, 177
buccinator muscles, 192
Chamberlain, Neville, 207
chest, puffing up, 103–4chest-shielding behavior, 93children
affection shown to, 130–31arm movement cessation of, 113foot movements of, 55shielding behaviors of, 94
clarity, of thought, 182Clinton, Bill, 184clothing, 92, 98–100cognition, higher order, 23–24cold, being, 95comfort/discomfort equation, 209–10comfort responses, 34–49. See also  
discomfort responses
facial muscles relaxed and, 169–70feet/leg displays of, 68–71

Page 255:
INDEX  241
head tilt displaying, 171
interpersonal interactions 
establishing, 209–10
interviewer establishing, 210–211isopraxism signs of, 212
looking away sign of, 182–83nonverbal communications and, 15signs of, 211–13spreading out as, 229–30synchrony and, 223–24torso splay and, 101–3ventral denial/fronting with, 88–91
communal survival, 27concerted/contextual observation, 8–10confessions, 220confidence. See high confidence; low 
confidence
confrontational situations, 66contempt, 192, 192–93
cooperation/truth, 221cooperative feet/legs, 76–78couples, 87courtship
arms behavior in, 125–28feet/leg displays during, 71–74
court testimony, 150criminal investigation, 146crossing arms, 91, 94
cultural behaviors, 138–39
danger, 118
Dangerfield, Rodney, 49da Vinci, Leonardo, 54Dean, Diana, 24deception
body language revealing, xiiicomfort/discomfort equation 
detecting, 209–10deliberate pensive displays in, 225
detection difficult of, 205–6discomfort responses and, 231facial expressions in, 56new detection approaches to, 209–22principal nonverbal behaviors in, 
223–25
specific nonverbal behaviors in, 
226–30
sweaty hands indicative of, 143–44territorial displays and, 229–30
defense wounds, 110de Gaulle, Charles, 203depression, clinical, 65detection
of deception, 205–6, 209–22in nonverbal behaviors, 223–25
disagreement, 189–92disapproval cues, 198–99discomfort responses, 34–49
deception and, 231facial expressions of, 168
false smile as, 216human beings indications of, 217–18nonverbal communications and, 15pacifiers and, 218–22signs of, 213–18tongue displays in, 193–95, 195
upside-down U indicative of, 188–89
disengagement, 60–61disgust, 200–201, 201
dishonesty
barriers built from, 214neocortex capable of, 25professionals perception of, 207–8stress and, 208
disrespect, 199distancing nonverbal behaviors, 31–32
the arms in, 119flight response as, 31–32

Page 256:
242 INDEX
distrust, 185
dominance display
of genital framing, 155–56, 156
stance of, 66–67, 125
downward gaze, 182–83
Eisenhower, Dwight David, 97
ejector seat position, 227
Ekman, Paul, 162emotions. See also  negative feelings; 
positive feelings
arms transmitting, 109–10couples pulling apart through, 87of face, 167–70pupil dilation indicating, 179
emphasis
hands lacking, 226–27honesty using, 224–25
endorphins, 41environment, observation of, 7–10erect position, 230Europe, gestures in, 202, 202–3
evasive actions, 31exhaling, 41
eye-blink behavior, 183–84eye-blocking, 33, 177, 216
FBI using, 178limbic system employing, 178as nonverbal communication, 3pupillary constriction/squinting as, 
172, 172–75, 174–75
undesirable images protection from, 
176–79
eyebrows
lowered, 175raised, 181–82
eye contact, 216eye-flutter behavior, 183–84, 216eye-gaze behavior, 67, 182–83
eye-lid behavior, xiithe eyes
brief touching of, 177
eye flash of, 179–82flashbulb, 179, 180
nonverbal behaviors of, 170–85positive feelings shown by, 179rolling of, 199
the face
disapproval cues through, 198–99emotional displays of, 167–70facial blushing/blanching of, 198furrowed forehead of, 168, 195–97, 
196
gravity-defying behaviors of, 202–3happiness reflected in, 169–70muscles relaxed of, 169–70negative feelings expressed by, 167nonverbal behaviors of, 195–201nose flaring of, 197pacifying behavior involving, 45poker, 56touching, 41
facebook, 48
facial expressions
deceitful, 56disapproval cues in, 198–99of discomfort, 168
disgust gesture of, 200–201interpretation difficult of, 204meaningful insights from, 166–67mixed signals from, 203universal language of, 165–66
false smile, 187
as discomfort display, 216real smile v., 186–87

Page 257:
INDEX  243
FBI. See Federal Bureau of 
Investigation
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
2, 178
the feet/legs, 54–55. See also  foot 
behavior; the legs
children’s movements of, 55cooperative/noncooperative, 76–78courtship displays of, 71–74gravity-defying behaviors of, 63–65high comfort displays of, 68–71as honest body part, 53, 55–57impatience and, 59–60interlocking of, 81, 81–83
leg splay with, 65–67limbic system reaction of, 54–55movement changes of, 78–80nonverbal behavior involving, 57–60, 
170
shifting away, 60–61, 62, 78
fight response
aggressive survival through, 32–33, 
176
of limbic system, 32–34personal space threats and, 33–34
finger
pointing, 139–41, 140
snapping, 140
flashbulb eyes, 179, 180
flight response
distancing nonverbal behaviors of, 
31–32
of limbic system, 30–32threat escape of, 30–31
foot behavior
children and, 55freeze, 80–81, 82
as intention cue, 61, 62
jiggling/kicking, 79–80romance and, 72–73forehead
furrowed, 168, 195–97, 196
rubbing, 40
“A Four-Domain Model of Detecting 
Deception: An Alternative Paradigm for Interviewing,” 209
Frank, Mark G., 230freeze response
arm behavior as, 112foot behavior and, 80–81, 82
of limbic system, 26–29, 158
frozen hands, 157
genital framing, 155–56, 156
gestures. See also  microgestures
disgust, 200–201nose-up, 202, 202–3
offensive hand, 139–41powerful hand, 135travel knowing acceptable, 200
Gestures: The Do’s and Taboos of Body 
Language Around the World  
(Axtell), 140
The Gift of Fear  (Becker), 36
Gottman, John, 193gravity-defying behaviors
of arms, 110–11of face, 202–3of feet/legs, 63–65
gravity-related movements, 110–11“guilty knowledge,” 209, 221–22
Hall, Edward, 68
hand displays
arms restrained and, 157of high confidence, 147–50

Page 258:
244 INDEX
hand displays ( continued )
of low confidence/stress, 157–61
the hands
changing behaviors of, 161–63emphasis lacking in, 226–27frozen, 157holding of, 138–39human brain and, 133–34interlaced stroking of, 158–59, 159
microexpressions of, 161negative feelings created by, 135–36nonverbals of, 144–47offensive gestures of, 139–41persuasive speakers movement of, 
134–35
physical appearance of, 142–43powerful gestures of, 135shakiness and, 145–47steepling of, 147–50, 148, 226
sweat and, 143–44thumb displays of, 150–51wringing of, 149, 157–58
handshake
politician’s, 137–38power of, 136–39
happiness, 169–70happy feet, 57–60, 170the head
movements of, 217tilt, 171
high confidence
hand displays of, 147–50hand steepling behavior of, 147–50happy feet as, 57–60, 170high-status individuals with, 151–52,  
152
in nonverbal behavior, 35nose-up gesture as, 202, 202–3
steepling purveyor of, 149thumb displays showing, 150–51higher-order cognition/memory, 23–24
high-status individuals, 120, 151–52,  
152
Hitler, Adolf, 135, 207holding hands, 138–39honesty, 206–7
body part reflecting, 53, 55–57emphasis used in, 224–25limbic system/brain creating, 23
hooding effect, 124, 124–25
hug, 48–49human beings
discomfort indications of, 217–18limbic system regulation by, 65subconsciously leaning away from, 
32, 90
subtle observation of, 17sudden behavioral changes in, 13–15thoughts of, xii
human body
nonverbal messages of, 17–18silent language of, xivthoughts/feelings transmitted by, 2
human brain
behavior governed by, 50–51hands subtle nuances and, 133–34limbic system of, xiv, 22–23pupil dilation and, 172–74
“human lie detector,” xii
idiosyncratic nonverbal behavior, 12
impatience, 59–60innocent people, 220insecurity, 155
insights, 166–67intention cues, 16
foot behavior as, 61, 62
starter’s position as, 66

Page 259:
INDEX  245
interlaced stroking, hands, 158–59, 159
interlocking of feet/legs, 81, 81–83
interpersonal interactions, 4
comfort responses established in, 
209–10
discomfort signs in, 213–18feet shifting away in, 60–61, 62, 78
knowledge enriching, 234pacifying nonverbals in, 218–22
interpretation, 204interviews
comfort zone established in, 
210–211
discomfort signs in, 213–18eye-lid behavior understood in, xiinervousness in, 219pacifying behaviors in, 37, 218–22patience in, 220synchrony and, 211–13
isopraxism, 90, 212
behaviors mirrored through, 211communal survival through, 27
jaw tightening, 167–68
Jordan, Michael, 193
Kennedy, John F., 151
knee clasp, 62–63, 63
knowledge, 209, 221–22, 234kowtow position, 96–97Kulis, Joe, 79
leaning away, 32, 90
leg-kick response, 79–80the legs. See also  feet/legs
cleansing, 46, 46–47
crossing, 68–71, 69, 70, 73, 74
splay, 65–67
lie detector, xiilife, successful in, 5limbic system, 23–34
comfort/discomfort responses of, 
34–49
danger exposure limited by, 118eye-blocking from, 178feet/legs reaction from, 54–55fight response of, 32–34flight response of, 30–32freeze response of, 26–29, 158genuine behaviors regulated by, 24as honest brain, 23human beings regulating, 65of human brain, xiv, 22–23nonverbal responses of, 25–34override difficult of, 226–27past negative feelings from, 36stress/nervousness and, 144–45torso protection from, 107
the lips
compression of, 10–11, 187–89, 
190
disappearing, 187–89, 188, 190
pursed, 11, 189–92, 191
looking away, 182–83low confidence
hand displays of, 157–61lowered eyebrows sign of, 175low-status individuals and, 153–54, 
155
neck touching and, 159–60in nonverbal behavior, 35thumb displays showing, 
153–54
low-status individuals, 153–54, 155

Page 260:
246 INDEX
lying
brain, 25detecting, 207–8emphasis unnatural when, 
224–25
eye contact during, 216frozen hands and, 157hand steepling less when, 226physical contact and, 215restraining behavior during, 82as social survival tool, 208
MacArthur, Douglas, 97
MacLean, Paul, 22McFadden, Martin, 18memory, higher order, 23–24men, tie adjusting of, 42
messages, arms communicating, 116microexpressions, of hands, 161microgestures, 162, 200–201, 201
military personnel, 121mixed signals, facial expressions, 203Morris, Desmond, 54, 75, 140the mouth, 185–95movement changes, 78–80multiple tells, 13, 83
nail-biting, 143, 197–98
nasal wing dilation, 197the neck
covering dimple of, 38, 39
happiness reflected in, 169–70not covering, 160pacifying behaviors involving, 42–43, 
43
touching, 40, 44, 159–60negative feelings, 36
arms down for, 110–11faces expressing, 167hands hidden creating, 135–36lip compression indicative of, 187–89of preening, 141–42turtle effect showing, 106
neocortex, 22
dishonesty capability of, 25higher-order cognition/memory 
performed by, 23–24
nervousness, 219neural imaging, xiiNixon, Richard, 184, 207noncooperative feet/legs, 76–78nonverbal behaviors
in deception, 205–6, 223–25, 226–30defining, 2–5distancing, 31–32of the eyes, 170–85of the face, 195–201feet/legs involved in, 57–60, 170of the hands, 144–47high/low confidence in, 35idiosyncratic, 12interpersonal communications using, 
4
of the mouth, 185–95people’s thoughts deciphered 
through, xii
signs of, 233–34stress displayed through, 29synchrony in, 211–13universal tells of, 10–11upper body, 86–106walking style important as, 76
nonverbal communications
comfort v. noncomfort, 15contextual observation 
understanding, 8–10

Page 261:
INDEX  247
decoding, 6
decoding ten commandments of, 
7–17
eye-blink frequency and, 183–84eye-blocking as, 3false/misleading, 15human body giving off, 17–18limbic systems responses of, 25–34poker players understanding of, 6successful life learning, 5tells of, 4
the nose
flaring of, 197touching of, 222up gesture of, 202, 202–3
observation
of body language/environment, 7–10, 
55–57
concerted/contextual, 8–10of human beings, 17
offensive gestures, of hands, 139–41orbicularis oculi, 186–87
pacifying behaviors, 34–49
discomfort responses and, 218–22of face, 45guidelines of, 49–50increased use of, 219in investigative interviews, 37, 218–22leg cleansing as, 46–47of neck, 42–43, 43
of self-administered body-hug, 48–49stress linked to, 50threatening experience followed by, 
35–37types of, 39–42
as ventilator, 47–48, 49
of women, 38–39
palm-up position, 228patience, in interviews, 220pensive displays, 225personality, borderline, 129personal space, 33–34pheromones, 197physical appearance, 100
of hands, 142–43preening and, 101
physical contact, lying and, 215poker face, 56poker players, 6police officers, 122politician’s handshake, 137–38positive feelings
arms up for, 110–11eye behaviors showing, 179eye flash displaying, 179–82flashbulb eyes showing, 179, 180
predators
eye contact of, 216walking speed/direction of, 77
preening, 101, 141–42pressure marks, 114primitive man, 27problematic issue, 11professionals, 207–8protection of torso, 92proxemics, spatial needs, 68proximity issues, 75psychological flight, 161–62“pugilistic position,” 197pupil dilation
brain’s visual information increased 
from, 172–74
factors involved in, 181positive emotions indicated by, 179

Page 262:
248 INDEX
pupillary constriction, 172, 172–75
pursed lips
disagreement causing, 189–92, 
191
problematic issue causing, 11
raised eyebrows, 181–82
“rapport building,” 209–10real smile, 186–87, 187
Reesam, Ahmed, 24Reeser, Marc, 173regal stance, 117
restrained arm behavior, 115restraining behavior, 82restricted movement, 112–15risorius, 187rogatory position, 227–29, 228
rolling of the eyes, 199romance, 72–73roving eyes, 183
security force, 154
self-restraint, 112sensuous pleasure, 127“shake and wait” approach, 75shaky hands, 145–47shielding behaviors, of children, 94shoplifters, 115shoulder
rise, 105–6shrug, 104–5, 105, 230
signs
of comfort responses, 182–83, 211–13, 
212
of discomfort responses, 213–18of low confidence, 175of nonverbal behavior, 233–34
of stress, 197–98
silent language, xiv“situational awareness,” 8–10smile
barometer, 186false, 186–87, 187, 216
lines, 196–97real, 186–87, 187
the sneer, 192, 192–93
social harmony, 89, 132social interactions, 31social survival tool, 208society, 206–7socioeconomic status, 129sounds, 45spatial needs, 68speakers
hand movement of, 134–35looking away from, 182–83
splay behavior, 101–3, 102
spreading out, 229–30squinting, 168, 174–75
different meanings of, 176as eye-blocking, 172, 172–75, 174–75
starter’s position, 65, 66
steepling, hand, 148, 149
high confidence behavior of, 147–50liars using less, 226
stomach, upset, 96stress
dishonesty and, 208ejector seat position indicative of, 
227
freeze mode under, 80–81, 82
hand displays of, 157–61heaving chest during, 103–4isolating causes of, 222jaw tightening indicating, 167–68limbic system and, 144–45

Page 263:
INDEX  249
nail biting sign of, 197–98
nonverbal behavior showing, 29pacifying behavior linked to, 50signs of, 197–98women dealing with, 44yawning caused by, 45
students/teachers, 2suprasternal notch, 38–39, 42, 43
Supreme Court decision, 18–19survival
animal heritage of, 25–26communal, 27
swallows, hard, 217sweaty hands, 143–44synchrony
comfort levels and, 223–24in nonverbal behaviors, 211–13
tattoos, 129
teachers/students, 2tells. See also  multiple tells
eye-blocking as, 178multiple, 13, 83of nonverbal behavior, 10–11of nonverbal communications, 4restrained arm behavior as, 115universal, 10–11
ten commandments, nonverbal 
communications, 7–17
territorial displays, 65–67, 102
of the arms, 119–31arms spread in, 126
deception and, 229–30significant changes in, 128
territorial imperative, 68Terry v. Ohio,  18–19
thoughts/feelings, 2, 182threatening experience, 30–31, 35–37thumb displays
high confidence in, 150–51insecurity in, 155
low confidence in, 153–54
tie, men adjusting, 42
toes, pointing upward, 64
tongue displays, 193–95, 195
the torso
adornments, 98baring, 103bow, 95–97breathing behavior and, 
103–4
embellishments, 97–100lean, 86–87, 90
limbic system protecting, 107protecting, 92shield, 91–95splays, 101–3true sentiments reflected by, 85
travel, 200truth
of body language, 4cooperation not equated to, 221society functioning on, 206–7the torso reflecting, 85
“turtle effect,” 29, 30, 106
undesirable images, 176–79
United States, 198–99universal language, 165–66upper body, 86–106upside-down U, 188–89
the ventilator, 47–48, 49
ventral denial/fronting, 88–91

Page 264:
250 INDEX
ventral side, pressure marks on, 114
verbal altercation, 33voice, 217Vrij, Aldert, 226
walking
different styles of, 75–76nonverbal behaviors in, 76predators speed/direction of, 77
Walters, Barbara, 79warning signal, 14withdrawal, of arms, 111–12
women
pacifying behaviors of, 38–39stress reactions of, 44
wringing, hands, 149, 157–58
yawning, 45zygomaticus major, 186–87

Page 265:
on your favorite HarperCollins author. Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive informationAbout the Autho rs
For twenty-ﬁ  ve years, JOE NAVARRO  was an FBI counterintel-
ligence special agent and supervisor specializing in nonverbal communications. A frequent lecturer, he serves on the adjunct faculty at Saint Leo University and the FBI. 
MARVIN KARLINS
received his Ph.D. in psychology from Princeton University and is senior professor of management at the University of South Florida. He is the author of twenty-three books and most recently collaborated with Joe Navarro on Phil Hellmuth 
Presents Read ’Em and Reap .

Page 266:
ALSO BY JOE NAVARRO WITH MARVIN KARLINS
Phil Hellmuth Presents Read ’Em and Reap

Page 267:
Credits
Designed by Susan Walsh
Cover design by Victor Mingovits for Mucca Design
Photographs of Joe Navarro by Mark WempleIllustrations (except for the limbic brain diagram) by David R. Andrade

Page 268:
Copyright 
WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING. Copyright © 2008 by Joe 
Navarro. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books. 
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader March 2008 ISBN 978-0-06-164486-3 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

Page 269:
Australia 
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia Canada 
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 
New Zealand 
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited 
Auckland, New Zealand 
United Kingdom 
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 77-85 Fulham Palace Road London, W6 8JB, UK 
United States 
HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 10 East 53rd Street About the Publisher  
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au 
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900 
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca 
P .O. Box 1 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz 
http://www.uk.harpercollinsebooks.com 
New York, NY 10022 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com 

