page 1:
WHAT EVERY

-

"An Ex-FBI Agent’s Guide
to Speed-Reading People

JOE NAVARRO

with Marvin Karlins, Ph.D.


--------------------------------------------------
page 2:
& HarperCollins e-books

--------------------------------------------------
page 3:
WHAT EVERY

1S SAYING

Agent’s Guide
to Speed-

JOE NAVARRGO

FBI Special Agent (Ret.)

with Marvin Karlins, Ph.D.

--------------------------------------------------
page 4:
To my grandmother, Adelina, whose withered
hands lovingly molded a child into a man.
—JOE NAVARRO

To my wite, Edyth, who has blessed me with her love
and taught me what it means to be a caring human being.
—MARVIN KARLINS

--------------------------------------------------
page 5:
ONE

TWO
THREE

FOUR

FIVE
SIX

CONTENTS

Foreword: I See What You’re Thinking

Acknowledgments

Mastering the Secrets of Nonverbal

Communication
Living Our Limbic Legacy

Getting a LLeg Up on Body Language:
Nonverbals of the Feet and Legs

Torso Tips: Nonverbals of the
Torso, Hips, Chest, and Shoulders

Knowledge Within Reach: Nonverbals of the Arms

Getting a Grip: Nonverbals of the
Hands and Fingers

V1

21

53

85
109

133

--------------------------------------------------
page 6:
CONTENTS

SEVEN  The Mind’s Canvas: Nonverbals of the Face
EIGHT  Detecting Deception: Proceed with Caution!
NINE  Some Final Thoughts

Bibliography

Index

About the Authors

Other Books by Joe Navarro with Marvin Karlins

Credits

Cover

Copyright

About the Publisher

165
205
233
235
239

--------------------------------------------------
page 7:
FOREWORD

| See What
You're Thinking

Marvin Karlins, Ph.D.

he man sat stoically at one end of the table, carefully cratting his

replies to the FBI agent’s inquiries. He wasn't considered a major
suspect in the murder case. His alib1 was believable and he sounded
sincere, but the agent pressed on nevertheless. With the suspect’s consent,

he was asked a series of questions about the murder weapon:

“If you had committed this crime, would you have used a gun?”
“If you had committed this crime, would you have used a knifer”
“If you had committed this crime, would you have used an ice pick?”

“If you had committed this crime, would you have used a hammer?”

One of the weapons, the ice pick, had actually been used in the
commission of the crime, but that information had been kept from the
public. Thus, only the killer would know which object was the real

murder weapon. As the FBI agent went down the list of weapons, he

--------------------------------------------------
page 8:
VI FOREWORD

observed the suspect carefully. When the ice pick was mentioned, the
man’s eyelids came down hard and stayed down until the next weapon
was named. The agent instantly understood the significance of the
eyelid behavior he had witnessed, and from that moment forward the
“minor’ suspect became the primary person of interest in the investiga-
tion. He later confessed to the crime.

Chalk one up for Joe Navarro, a remarkable human being who, 1n
addition to unmasking the ice-pick killer, 1s credited with catching scores
of criminals, including “master spies,” in a distinguished twenty-five-
year career with the FBI. How was he able to do this? If you asked him,
he quietly would say, “I owe it to being able to read people.”

Joe, 1t turns out, has spent his entire professional life studying, refin-
ing, and applying the science of nonverbal communications—tfacial ex-
pressions, gestures, physical movements (kinesics), body distance
(proxemics), touching (haptics), posture, even clothing—to decipher what
people are thinking, how they intend to act, and whether their pro-
nouncements are true or false. This 1s not good news for criminals, ter-
rorists, and spies, who, under his caretul scrutiny, usually give oft more
than enough nonverbal body signals (“tells”) to make their thoughts and
intentions transparent and detectable.

[t 1s, however, very good news for you, the reader, because the very
same nonverbal knowledge Joe relied on to become a master “Spycatcher,”
“human lie detector,” and instructor at the FBI 1s what he will be sharing
with you so you can better understand the feelings, thoughts, and inten-
tions of those around you. As a renowned author and educator, Joe will
teach you how to observe like an expert, detecting and deciphering the
nonverbal behaviors of others so you can interact with them more suc-
cessfully. For business or for pleasure, this knowledge will enrich and
magnify your life.

Much of what Joe will be sharing with you in this book was not even
recognized fifteen years ago by the scientific community. It 1s only
through recent advances in brain-scan technology and neural imaging
that scientists have been able to establish the validity of the behaviors Joe

will be describing. Drawing from the latest discoveries in psychology,

--------------------------------------------------
page 9:
FOREWORD VIl

neurobiology, medicine, sociology, criminology, communication studies,
and anthropology——plus his quarter century of experience using nonver-
bal behavior 1in his work as an FBI Special Agent—]Joe 1s uniquely
qualitied to help you succeed in your understanding of nonverbal com-
munications. His expertise 1s recognized and sought worldwide. Besides
being interviewed regularly on programs such as NBC’s Today Show,
CNN Headline News, Fox Cable News, and ABC’s Good Morning America,
he continues to conduct seminars on nonverbal communication for the
FBI and the CIA, as well as for other members of the intelligence com-
munity. He 1s a consultant to the banking and insurance industries as
well as to major law firms in the United States and abroad. Joe also
teaches at Saint LLeo University and at various medical schools through-
out the United States, where his unique insights into nonverbal commu-
nication have found a receptive audience among many, including
physicians desiring to assess patients with greater speed and accuracy.
Joe’s combination of academic skills and occupational credentials—cou-
pled with his masterful analysis of nonverbal communications in real-
lite, high-stakes situations—has placed him apart and in the foretront of
nonverbal expertise, as you will discover in this book.

After working with Joe, attending his seminars, and putting his ideas
to work 1in my own life, I firmly believe that the material in these pages
represents a major advance in our understanding of all things nonverbal.
[ say this as a trained psychologist who got involved in this writing proj-
ect because I was excited by Joe’s pioneering work 1n harnessing the sci-
entific knowledge of nonverbal communications to achieve professional
objectives and personal success.

[ was also impressed by his reasoned, careful approach to the topic.
For example, while observing nonverbals allows us to get an “accurate
read” on many kinds of behavior, Joe warns us that using body language
to detect deception 1s a particularly ditticult and challenging task. This 1s
a significant insight—rarely recognized by laypeople or by the law en-
forcement community—and serves as a critical and poignant reminder
to be very careful before you declare a person to be honest or dishonest

based on his nonverbal behaviors.

--------------------------------------------------
page 10:
X FOREWORD

Unlike many other books on nonverbal behavior, the information
presented herein 1s based on scientitic facts and field-tested findings
rather than on personal opinion and armchair speculations. Further, the
text highlights what other published works often 1gnore: the critical role
played by the limbic system of the human brain in understanding and us-
ing nonverbal cues effectively.

The silent language of the body can be yours to master. Whether you
are studying nonverbals because you want to get ahead in your job or
stmply want to get along better with friends and family, this book 1s de-
signed for you. Gaining protficiency will require a careful examination of
the chapters that follow, plus a commitment to spend some serious time
and energy learning and applying Joe’s teachings in your daily routines.

Reading people successtully—learning, decoding, and utilizing non-
verbal behavior to predict human actions—is a task well worth your at-
tention, one that offers ample rewards for the etfort expended. So plant
your feet firmly on the tloor, turn to the next page, and get ready to learn
and watch for those all-important nonverbal behaviors that Joe will be
teaching you. It won't be long betore you discover, with just a glance,

what every body 1s saying.

--------------------------------------------------
page 12:
X| ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

with one look he can communicate volumes with exquisite clarity. He 1s a
man who commands respect, just by being. And from my grandmother,
to whom I dedicate this book, I learned that small behaviors have great
significance: a smile, a head tilt, a gentle touch at the right time can con-
vey so much; it can even heal. These things they taught me every day, and
in so doing, prepared me to observe more aptly the world around me.
Their teachings as well as those of many others are found 1n these pages.

While I was at Brigham Young University, J. Wesley Sherwood,
Richard Townsend, and Dean Clive Winn II taught me much about
police work and observing criminals. Later, in the FBI, people such as
Doug Gregory, Tom Riley, Julian “Jay” Koerner, Dr. Richard Ault, and
David G. Major taught me the subtle nuances of counterintelligence and
espionage behavior. To them I am grateful for sharpening my people-
watching skills. Similarly, I have to thank Dr. John Schater, former FBI
agent and fellow member of the bureau’s elite Behavioral Analysis Pro-
gram, who encouraged me to write and allowed me to be his coauthor on
multiple occasions. Marc Reeser, who was with me 1n the trenches catch-
ing spies for so long, also deserves my recognition. To my other col-
leagues, and there were many in the National Security Division of the
FBI, I thank you for all your support.

Over the years, the FBI ensured we were taught by the best, and so at
the hands of professors Joe Kulis, Paul Ekman, Maureen O’Sullivan,
Mark Frank, Bella M. DePaulo, Aldert Vr1j, Reid Meloy, and Judy Bur-
goon | learned about the research on nonverbal communications directly
or through their writings. I developed a triendship with many of these
individuals, including David Givens, who heads the Center tor Nonver-
bal Studies in Spokane, Washington, and whose writings, teachings, and
admonitions I have taken to heart. Their research and writings have en-
riched my lite, and I have included their work 1n this volume as well as
that of other giants such as Desmond Morris, Edward Hall, and Charles
Darwin, who started 1t all with his seminal book The expression of the
emotions 1n man and animals.

While these people provided the academic framework, others con-

tributed 1n their own ways to this project, and I must recognize them

--------------------------------------------------
page 13:
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Xl

individually. My dear triend Elizabeth Lee Barron, at the University of
Tampa, 1s a godsend when it comes to research. I am also indebted to Dr.
Phil Quinn at the University of Tampa and to Professor Barry Glover, at
Saint L.eo University, for their years of triendship and willingness to ac-
commodate my busy travel schedule.

This book would not be the same without photographs, and for that
[ am grateful for the work of renowned photographer Mark Wemple.
My gratitude also goes out to Ashlee B. Castle, my administrative assis-
tant, who, when asked 1f she was willing to make taces for a book, merely
said, “Sure, why not?” You guys are great. I also want to thank Tampa
artist David R. Andrade for his 1llustrations.

Matthew Benjamin, my ever-patient editor at HarperCollins, put this
project together and deserves my praise for being a gentleman and a con-
summate professional. My praise also goes to Executive Editor Toni Sci-
arra, who worked so diligently to finalize this project. Matthew and
Ton1 work with a wondertul team of people at HarperCollins, including
copy editor Paula Cooper, to whom I owe many thanks. And as before, I
want to thank Dr. Marvin Karlins for once again shaping my ideas into
this book and for his kind words 1n the foreword.

My gratitude goes out to my dear friend Dr. Elizabeth A. Murray, a
true scientist and educator, who took time out from her busy teaching
schedule to edit the early drafts of this manuscript and share her volumi-
nous knowledge of the human body.

To my family—all of my family, near and far—I thank you for toler-
ating me and my writing when I should have been relaxing with you. To
Luca, muito obrigado. To my daughter, Stephanie, I give thanks every
day for your loving soul.

All of these individuals have contributed to this book in some way;
their knowledge and insight, small and large, 1s shared with you herein.
[ wrote this book with the sober knowledge that many of you will use
this information in your daily lives. To that end, I have worked assidu-
ously to present both the science and the empirical information with
diligence and clarity. It there are any errors in this book, they are my re-

sponsibility and mine alone.

--------------------------------------------------
page 14:
X111 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

There 1s an old Latin saying, “Qui1 docet, discit” (He who teaches,
learns). In many ways, writing 1s no ditferent; it 1s a process of learning
and discerning, which at the end of the day has been a pleasure. It 1s my
hope that when you come to the end of this book, you too will have
gained a profound knowledge of how we communicate nonverbally—
and that your life will be enriched, as mine has been, by knowing what

every body 1s saying.

Joe Navarro

Tampa, Florida
August 2007

--------------------------------------------------
page 15:
ONE

Mastering the Secrets of
Nonverbal Communication

henever I'm teaching people about “body language,” this
question 1s invariably asked. “Joe, what got you interested 1n
studying nonverbal behavior in the ftirst placer” It wasn’t
something I had planned to do, nor was it the result of some long-term
fascination with the topic. It was much more down-to-earth than that.
[t was an 1nterest born of necessity, the need to adapt successtully to a
totally new way of lite. When I was eight years old, I came to America
as an exile from Cuba. We lett just a few months atter the Bay ot Pigs
invasion, and we honestly thought we would be here only for a short
while as retugees.
Unable to speak English at first, I did what thousands of other 1m-
migrants coming to this country have done. I quickly learned that to tit
in with my new classmates at school, I needed to be aware of—and sen-

sitive to—the “other” language around me, the language ot nonverbal

--------------------------------------------------
page 16:
2 WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

behavior. I found that was a language I could translate and understand
immediately. In my young mind, I saw the human body as a kind of
billboard that transmitted (advertised) what a person was thinking via
gestures, tacial expressions, and physical movements that I could read.
Over time, obviously, I learned English—and even lost some skill with
the Spanish language—Dbut the nonverbals, I never forgot. I discovered
at an early age that I could always rely on nonverbal communications.

[ learned to use body language to decipher what my classmates and
teachers were trying to communicate to me and how they felt about me.
One of the first things I noticed was that students or teachers who genu-
inely liked me would raise (or arch) their eyebrows when they first saw me
walk 1nto the room. On the other hand, those individuals who weren't too
friendly toward me would squint their eyes slightly when I appeared—a
behavior that once observed 1s never forgotten. I used this nonverbal infor-
mation, as so many other immigrants have, quickly to evaluate and develop
friendships, to communicate despite the obvious language barrier, to avoid
enemies, and 1n nurturing healthy relationships. Many years later I would
use these same nonverbal eye behaviors to solve crimes as a special agent at
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) (see box 1).

Based on my background, education, and training, I want to teach
you to see the world as an FBI expert on nonverbal communication
views it: as a vivid, dynamic environment where every human interaction
resonates with information, and as an opportunity to use the silent lan-
guage of the body to enrich your knowledge of what people are think-
ing, feeling, and intending to do. Using this knowledge will help you
stand out among others. It will also protect you and give you previously

hidden 1nsight into human behavior.

WHAT EXACTLY IS NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION?

Nonverbal communication, often referred to as nonverbal behavior or
body language, 1s a means of transmitting information—just like the

spoken word—except 1t 1s achieved through tacial expressions, gestures,

--------------------------------------------------
page 17:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION

BOX 1: IN THE BLINK OF AN EYE

"BEye-blocking” 1s a nonverbal behavior that can occur when we feel
threatened and/or don't like what we see. Squinting (as In the case with
my classmates, described above) and closing or shielding our eyes are
actions that have evolved to protect the brain from “seeing” undesirable
images and to communicate our disdain toward others.

As an Investigator, | used eye-blocking behaviors to assist in the arson
investigation of a tragic hotel fire in Puerto Rico that claimed ninety-seven
lves. A security guard came under immediate suspicion because the
blaze broke out In an area where he was assigned. One of the ways we
determined he had nothing to do with starting the fire was by asking him
some very specific questions as to where he was before the fire, at the
time of the fire, and whether or not he set the fire. After each question
| observed his face for any telltale signs of eye-block behavior. His eyes
blocked only when questioned about where he was when the fire started.
Oddly, in contrast, he did not seem troubled by the question, “Did you set
the fire?” This told me the real issue was his location at the time of the
fire, not his possible involvement in setting the fire. He was questioned
further on this topic by the lead investigators and eventually admitted to
leaving his post to visit his girlfriend, who also worked at the hotel. Unfor-
tunately, while he was gone, the arsonists entered the area he should
have been guarding and started the fire.

In this case, the guard’s eye-blocking behavior gave us the insight we
needed to pursue a line of questioning that eventually broke the case
open. In the end, three arsonists responsible for the tragic blaze were ar-
rested and convicted of the crime. The security guard, while woefully
negligent and burdened with tremendous guilt, was not, however, the

culprit.

3

--------------------------------------------------
page 18:
4 WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

touching (haptics), physical movements (kinesics), posture, body adorn-
ment (clothes, jewelry, hairstyle, tattoos, etc.), and even the tone, timbre,
and volume of an individual’s voice (rather than spoken content).
Nonverbal behaviors comprise approximately 60 to 65 percent of all
interpersonal communication and, during lovemaking, can constitute
100 percent of communication between partners (Burgoon, 1994,
229-285).

Nonverbal communication can also reveal a person’s true thoughts,
feelings, and 1ntentions. For this reason, nonverbal behaviors are some-
times referred to as tells (they tell us about the person’s true state of
mind). Because people are not always aware they are communicating
nonverbally, body language is often more honest than an individual’s

verbal pronouncements, which are consciously crafted to accomplish the

speaker’s objectives (see box 2).

BOX 2: ACTIONS SPEAK LOUDER THAN WORDS

A memorable example of how body language can sometimes be more
truthful than verbal language involved the rape of a young woman on the
Parker Indian Reservation in Arizona. A suspect In the case was brought
N for questioning. His words sounded convincing and his story was plau-
sible. He claimed he hadn’t seen the victim and while out in a tield had
gone down a row of cotton, turned left, and then walked straight to his
house. While my colleagues |otted down notes about what they were
hearing, | kept my eyes on the suspect and saw that as he told the story
about turning left and going home, his hand gestured to his right, which
was exactly the direction that led to the rape scene. It | hadn't been
watching him, | wouldn't have caught the discrepancy between his verpal
(“l went left”) and nonverbal (hand gesturing to the right) behavior. But
once | saw It | suspected he was lying. | waited a while and then con-

fronted him again, and in the end he confessed to the crime.

--------------------------------------------------
page 19:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION 5

Whenever your observation of another person’s nonverbal behavior
helps you understand that person’s feelings, intentions, or actions—or
clarities his or her spoken words—then you have successtully decoded

and used this silent medium.

USING NONVERBAL BEHAVIOR TO
ENHANCE YOUR LIFE

[t has been well established by researchers that those who can effec-
tively read and interpret nonverbal communication, and manage how
others perceive them, will enjoy greater success 1n life than individuals
who lack this skill (Goleman, 1995, 13-92). It 1s the goal ot this book
to teach you how to observe the world around you and to determine
the meaning of nonverbals in any setting. This powertul knowledge
will enhance your personal interactions and enrich your life, as 1t has
mine.

One of the fascinating things about an appreciation for nonverbal
behavior 1s 1its universal applicability. It works everywhere humans inter-
act. Nonverbals are ubiquitous and reliable. Once you know what a spe-
cific nonverbal behavior means, you can use that information 1n any
number of different circumstances and 1n all types of environments. In
fact, 1t 1s difficult to interact ettectively without nonverbals. It you ever
wondered why people still fly to meetings in the age of computers, text
messages, e-mails, telephones, and video conferencing, it is because of the
need to express and observe nonverbal communications in person. Noth-
ing beats seeing the nonverbals up close and personal. Whyr Because
nonverbals are powerful and they have meaning. Whatever you learn
from this book, you will be able to apply to any situation, in any setting.

Case 1n point (see box 3 on next page):

--------------------------------------------------
page 20:
o WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

BOX 3: GIVING A DOCTOR THE UPPER HAND

Several months ago | presented a seminar to a group of poker players on
how to use nonverbal behavior to read their opponents’ hands and win
more money at the tables. Because poker Is a game that emphasizes
bluffing and deception, players have a keen interest in being able to read
the tells of their opponents. For them, decoding nonverbal communica-
tions 1s critical to success. While many were grateful for the insights |
provided, what startled me was how many seminar participants were able
to see the value of understanding and utilizing nonverbal behavior beyond
the poker table.

Two weeks after the session ended | received an e-mail from one of
the participants, a physician from lTexas. “What | find most amazing,” he
wrote me, “is that what | learned in your seminar has also helped me in my
practice. 1he nonverbals you taught us in order to read poker players have
helped me read my patients, too. Now | can sense when they are uncom-
fortable, confident, or not being entirely truthful.” The doctor’s note speaks

to the universality of nonverbals and their value In all facets of life.

MASTERING NONVERBAL COMMUNICATIONS
REQUIRES A PARTNERSHIP

[ am convinced that any person possessing normal intelligence can learn
to use nonverbal communication to better themselves. I know this be-
cause for the past two decades I have taught thousands ot people, just like
you, how to successfully decode nonverbal behavior and use that infor-
mation to enrich their lives, the lives of their loved ones, and to achieve
their personal and professional goals. Accomplishing this, however, re-
quires that you and I establish a working partnership, each contributing

something of significance to our mutual effort.

--------------------------------------------------
page 21:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION 7/

Following the Ten Commandments for Observing
and Decoding Nonverbal Communications Successfully

Reading people successtully—collecting nonverbal intelligence to assess
their thoughts, feelings, and intentions—is a skill that requires constant
practice and proper training. To help you on the training side, I want
to provide you with some important guidelines—or commandments—to
maximize your effectiveness in reading nonverbals. As you incorporate
these commandments into your everyday life and make them part ot
your routine, they soon will become second nature to you, needing lit-
tle, if any, conscious thought. It’s a lot like learning to drive. Do you
remember the first time you gave that a go? It you were like me, you
were so concerned with operating the vehicle that it was difticult to
track what you were doing nside the car and concentrate on what was
happening on the road outside at the same time. It was only when you
felt comfortable behind the wheel that you were able to expand your
focus to encompass the total driving environment. That’s the way it 1s
with nonverbal behavior. Once you master the mechanics ot using non-
verbal communication ettectively, 1t will become automatic and you can

focus your full attention on decoding the world around you.

Commandment 1: Be a competent observer of your environment.
This 1s the most basic requirement for anyone wishing to decode and use
nonverbal communications.

Imagine the foolishness ot trying to listen to someone with plugs in
our ears. We couldn’t hear the message and whatever was said would
be lost on us. Thus, most intent listeners don’t go around wearing ear-
plugs! Yet, when i1t comes to seeing the silent language of nonverbal
behavior, many viewers might as well be wearing blindtolds, as oblivi-
ous as they are to the body signals around them. Consider this. Just as
caretul listening 1s critical to understanding our verbal pronounce-
ments, so caretul observation 1s vital to comprehending our body lan-

guage. Whoa! Don’t just breeze past that sentence and continue

--------------------------------------------------
page 22:
3 WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

reading. What 1t states 1s critical. Concerted (ettorttul) observation—is
absolutely essential to reading people and detecting their nonverbal
tells successtully.

The problem 1s that most people spend their lives looking but not
truly seeing, or, as Sherlock Holmes, the meticulous English detective,
declared to his partner, Dr. Watson, “You see, but you do not observe.”
Sadly, the majority of individuals view their surroundings with a mini-
mal amount of observational etfort. Such people are oblivious to subtle
changes 1n their world. They are unaware of the rich tapestry ot details
that surrounds them, such as the subtle movement of a person’s hand or
foot that might betray his thoughts or intentions.

In fact, various scientific studies have demonstrated people to be
poor observers of their world. For example, when a man dressed in a
gorilla suit walked 1n tront of a group of students while other activities
were taking place, halt the students didn’t even notice the gorilla in
their midst (St mons & Chabris, 1999, 1059—-1074)!

Observation-impoverished individuals lack what airline pilots refer
to as “situational awareness,” which 1s a sense of where one 1s at all
times; they don’t have a solid mental picture of exactly what 1s going on
around them or even in tront of them. Ask them to go into a strange
room filled with people, give them a chance to look around, and then
tell them to close their eyes and report what they saw. You would be
astounded by their 1nability to recall even the most obvious teatures in
the room.

[ find 1t disheartening how often we run into somebody or read about
someone who always seems to be blindsided by life’s events. The com-

plaints of these individuals are nearly always the same:

"My wife just filed for divorce. I never had a clue she was unhappy

with our marriage.”

“The guidance counselor tells me my son has been using cocaine

for three years. | had no idea he had a drug problem.”

--------------------------------------------------
page 23:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION 9

"l was arguing with this guy and out of nowhere he sucker punched

me. | never saw 1t coming.”

“I thought the boss was pretty happy with my jo0b performance. |
nhad no idea | was going to be fired.”

These are the kinds of statements made by men and women who have
never learned how to observe the world around them ettectively. Such 1n-
adequacies are not surprising, really. After all, as we grow from children
to adults, we're never instructed on how to observe the nonverbal clues of
others. There are no classes in elementary school, high school, or college
that teach people situational awareness. It youre lucky, you teach yourselt
to be more observant. If you don't, you miss out on an incredible amount
of usetul information that could help you avoid problems and make your
lite more tultilling, be it when dating, at work, or with tamily.

Fortunately, observation is a skill that can be learned. We don’t have to
go through life being blindsided. Furthermore, because 1t 1s a skill, we can
get better at 1t with the right kind of training and practice. If you are ob-
servationally “challenged,” do not despair. You can overcome your weak-
ness 1n this area 1f you are willing to devote time and etfort to observing
your world more conscientiously.

What you need to do 1s make observation—concerted observation—a
way of life. Becoming aware of the world around you 1s not a passive act.
[t 1s a conscious, deliberate behavior—something that takes etfort, en-
ergy, and concentration to achieve, and constant practice to maintain.
Observation 1s like a muscle. It grows stronger with use and atrophies
without use. Exercise your observation muscle and you will become a
more powerful decoder of the world around you.

By the way, when I speak of concerted observation, I am asking you to
utilize all your senses, not just your sense of sight. Whenever I walk 1into
my apartment, [ take a deep breath. It things don’t smell “normal™ I be-
come concerned. One time [ detected the slight odor of lingering ciga-
rette smoke when I returned home trom a trip. My nose alerted me to

possible danger well before my eyes could scan my apartment. It turned

--------------------------------------------------
page 24:
10 WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

out that the apartment maintenance man had been by to tix a leaky pipe,
and the smoke on his clothes and skin were still lingering 1n the air sev-
eral hours later. Fortunately, he was a welcome intruder, but there could
just as easily have been a burglar lurking in the next room. The point 1s,
by using all my senses, I was better able to assess my environment and

contribute to my own safety and well-being.

Commandment 2: Observing in context is key to understanding
nonverbal behavior. When trying to understand nonverbal behavior in
real-life situations, the more you understand the context in which 1t takes
place, the better you will be at understanding what it means. For exam-
ple, atter a trattic accident, I expect people to be 1in shock and to walk
around looking dazed. I expect their hands to shake and even for them
to make poor decisions like walking into oncoming trattic. (This 1s why
officers ask you to stay in your car.) Why? After an accident, people are
suffering the etfects of a complete hijacking of the “thinking” brain by a
region of the brain known as the limbic system. The result of this hijack-
ing includes behaviors such as trembling, disorientation, nervousness,
and discomfort. In context, these actions are to be expected and confirm
the stress from the accident. During a job interview, I expect applicants
to be nervous 1nitially and for that nervousness to dissipate. It 1t shows up
again when I ask specific questions, then I have to wonder why these

nervous behaviors have suddenly presented again.

Commandment 3: Learn to recognize and decode nonverbal be-
haviors that are universal. Some body behaviors are considered uni-
versal because they are exhibited similarly by most people. For instance,
when people press their lips together in a manner that seems to make
them disappear, it 1s a clear and common sign that they are troubled and
something 1s wrong. This nonverbal behavior, known as lzp compression,
1s one of the universal tells that I will be describing 1n the chapters to fol-
low (see box 4). The more of these universal nonverbals you can recognize
and accurately interpret, the more effective you will be 1n assessing the

thoughts, feelings, and intentions ot those around you.

--------------------------------------------------
page 25:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION

BOX 4: A PURSING OF LIPS LEADS T0O
SAVINGS ON SHIPS

Universal tells of the lips were very helpful to me during a consulting as-
signment with a British shipping company. My British client had asked
me to sit through their contract negotiations with a huge multinational
corporation that would be outfitting their vessels. | agreed and suggested
that the proposed contract be presented point by point, with agreement
being reached on each item before moving forward. That way | could
more closely watch the corporate negotiator for any nonverbals that might
reveal information helpful to my client.

“I'll pass you a note If | spot something that needs your attention,” |
told my client and then settled back to watch the parties review the con-
tract clause by clause. | didn't have long to wait before | saw an important
tell. When a clause detalling the outfitting of a specific part of the vessel
was read—a construction phase involving millions of dollars—the chief
negotiator from the multinational corporation pursed his lips, a clear indi-
cation that something in this part of the contract was not to his liking.

| passed a note to my client, warning him that this particular clause In
the contract was contentious or problematic and should be revisited and
discussed thoroughly while we were all still together.

By confronting the issue then and there—and focusing on the detalls
of the clause In question—the two negotiators were able to hammer out
an agreement face-to-tface, which ended up saving my client 13.5 million
dollars. The negotiator’'s nonverbal signal of displeasure was the key evi-
dence needed to spot a specific problem and deal with It immediately

and effectively.

11

--------------------------------------------------
page 26:
12 WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

Commandment 4: Learn to recognize and decode idiosyncratic
nonverbal behaviors. Universal nonverbal behaviors constitute one
group of body cues: those that are relatively the same for everyone. There
1s a second type of body cue called an idiosyncratic nonverbal behavior,
which 1s a signal that 1s relatively unique to a particular individual.

In attempting to identity idiosyncratic signals, you'll want to be on
the lookout tor behavioral parterns in people you interact with on a regu-
lar basis (friends, family, coworkers, persons who provide goods or ser-
vices to you on a consistent basis). The better you know an individual, or
the longer you interact with him or her, the easier it will be to discover
this information because you will have a larger database upon which to
make your judgments. For example, 1f you note your teenager scratches
his head and bites his lip when he 1s about to take a test, this may be a
reliable 1diosyncratic tell that speaks of his nervousness or lack of prepa-
ration. INo doubt this has become part ot his repertoire for dealing with
stress, and you will see 1t again and again because “the best predictor of

future behavior 1s past behavior.”

Commandment 5: When you interact with others, try to establish
their baseline behaviors. In order to get a handle on the baseline behav-
1075 of the people with whom you regularly interact, you need to note how
they look normally, how they typically sit, where they place their hands,
the usual position of their feet, their posture and common facial expres-
sions, the tilt of their heads, and even where they generally place or hold
their possessions, such as a purse (see tigures 1 and 2). You need to be able
to differentiate between their “normal” tace and their “stressed” face.

Not getting a baseline puts you in the same position as parents who
never look down their child’s throat until the youngster gets sick. They
call the doctor and try to describe what they see inside, but they have no
means of making a comparison because they never looked at the child’s
throat when he or she was healthy. By examining what’s normal, we be-
gin to recognize and identity what’s abnormal.

Even in a single encounter with someone, you should attempt to note

--------------------------------------------------
page 27:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION 13

Fig. 1

/A
Note features of face when not stressed. A stressed face Is tense and slightly
tyes are relaxed and the lips should be contorted, eyebrows are knitted, and the
full. forehead is furrowed.

his or her “starting position” at the beginning of your interaction. Estab-
lishing a person’s baseline behavior 1s critical because 1t allows you to de-
termine when he or she deviates from it, which can be very important

and 1informative (see box 5).

Commandment 6: Always try to watch people for multiple
tells—behaviors that occur in clusters or in succession. Your ac-
curacy in reading people will be enhanced when you observe multiple
tells, or clusters of behavior body signals on which to rely. These signals
work together like the parts of a jigsaw puzzle. The more pieces of the
puzzle you possess, the better your chances of putting them all together
and seeing the picture they portray. To illustrate, if I see a business com-
petitor display a pattern of stress behaviors, followed closely by pacitying
behaviors, I can be more confident that she 1s bargaining from a position

of weakness.

Commandment 7: It’s important to look for changes in a person’s
behavior that can sighal changes in thoughts, emotions, interest,

or Intent. Sudden changes in behavior can help reveal how a person is

--------------------------------------------------
page 28:
14

WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

BOX 5: IT'S A RELATIVE MATTER

lImagine for a moment that you're the parent of an eight-year-old boy who
s walting In line to greet relatives at a large tamily reunion. As this Is a
yearly ritual, you have stood with your son on numerous occasions while
he walted his turn to say hello to everyone. He has never hesitated to run
up and give family members a big hug. However, on this occasion, when
t comes time to embrace his Uncle Harry, he stands stiff and frozen in
place.

“What's the matter?” you whisper to him, pushing him toward his
walting uncle.

Your son doesn't say anything, but he Is very reluctant to respond to
your physical signal.

What should you do? The important thing to note here iIs that your
son’s behavior Is a deviation from his baseline behavior. In the past, he
has never hesitated to greet his uncle with a hug. Why the change In be-
havior? His “freeze” response suggests he feels threatened or something
negative. Perhaps there is no justified reason for his fear, but to the obser-
vant and sensibly cautious parent, a warning signal should go off. Your
son’s deviation from his previous behavior suggests that something nega-
five might have occurred between him and his uncle since their last
meeting. Perhaps it was a simple disagreement, the awkwardness of
youth, or a reaction to the uncle’s preferential treatment of others. Then
again, this behavior might indicate sometning much more sinister. [he
point Is that a change In a person’s baseline benhavior suggests that some-
thing might be amiss and, in this particular case, probably warrants fur-

ther attention.

--------------------------------------------------
page 29:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION 15

processing information or adapting to emotional events. A child who 1s
exhibiting giddiness and delight at the prospect ot entering a theme
park will change his behavior immediately upon learning the park 1s
closed. Adults are no ditferent. When we get bad news over the phone
or see something that can hurt us, our bodies retlect that change imme-
diately.

Changes 1n a person’s behavior can also reveal his or her interest or
intentions 1n certain circumstances. Careful observation of such changes
can allow you to predict things before they happen, clearly giving you an
advantage—particularly 1f the impending action could cause harm to

you or others (see box 6).

Commandment 8: Learning to detect false or misleading nonver-
bal signals Is also critical. The ability to differentiate between authen-
tic and musleading cues takes practice and experience. It requires not only
concerted observation, but also some caretul judgment. In the chapters
to come, [ will teach you the subtle ditferences in a person’s actions that
reveal whether a behavior 1s honest or dishonest, increasing your
chances of getting an accurate read on the person with whom you are

dealing.

Commandment 9: Knowing how to distinguish between comfort
and discomfort will help you to focus on the most important be-
haviors for decoding nonverbal communications. Having studied
nonverbal behavior most of my adult life, I have come to realize that there
are two principal things we should look for and focus on: comfort and
discomfort. This 1s tundamental to how I teach nonverbal communica-
tions. LLearning to read comfort and discomfort cues (behaviors) in others
accurately will help you to decipher what their bodies and minds are truly
saying. It in doubt as to what a behavior means, ask yourself 1f this looks
like a comfort behavior (e.g., contentment, happiness, relaxation) or 1f 1t
looks like a discomfort behavior (e.g., displeasure, unhappiness, stress,
anxiety, tension). Most of the time you will be able to place observed be-

haviors 1n one of these two domains (comfort vs. discomfort).

--------------------------------------------------
page 30:
16

WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

BOX 6: A NOSE FOR TROUBLE

Among the most important nonverbal clues to a person’s thougnhts are
changes In body language that constitute intention cues. These are be-
haviors that reveal what a person Is about to do and provide the compe-
tent observer with extra time to prepare for the anticipated action before
t takes place.

One personal example of how critical it i1s to watch for changes In
people’s behavior—particularly when the changes involve intention cues—
involves an attempted robbery of a store where | worked. In this particular
situation, | noticed a man standing near the cash register at the checkout
counter, a behavior that caught my attention because he seemed to have
No reason to be there; he wasn't waiting in line and he hadn't purchased
any items. Moreover, the entire time he stood there, his eyes were fixed
on the cash register.

It he had just remained quietly where he was, | eventually would have
lost Interest In him and focused my attention elsewhere. However, while |
was still observing him, his behavior changed. Specifically, his nostrils start-
ing flaring (nasal wing dilation), which was a giveaway that he was oxygenat-
INg In advance of taking some action. | guessed what that action was going
to be about a second before it occurred. And a second was all | had to
sound a warning. | yelled to the cashier, “Watch out!” as three things hap-
npened at once: (a) the clerk finished ringing up a sale, causing the cash
drawer to open; (b) the man near the register lunged forward, plunging his
hand Into the drawer to grab some cash; and (c) alerted by my shouted
warning, the cashier grabbed the man's hand and twisted It, causing the
would-be robber to drop the money and run out of the store. Had | not spot-
ted his Iintention cue, | am sure the thier would have succeeded In his ef-
forts. Incidentally, the cashier was my father, who was running a small

hardware store in Miami back in 19/4. | was his summer hire.

--------------------------------------------------
page 31:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION 17/

Commandment 10: When observing others, be subtle about it.
Using nonverbal behavior requires you to observe people carefully and
decode their nonverbal behaviors accurately. However, one thing you
don’t want to do when observing others 1s to make your intentions obvi-
ous. Many individuals tend to stare at people when they first try to spot
nonverbal cues. Such intrusive observation i1s not advisable. Your 1deal
goal 1s to observe others without their knowing it, in other words, unob-
trusively.

Work at perfecting your observational skills, and you will reach a
point where your etforts will be both successtul and subtle. It’s all a mat-
ter of practice and persistence.

You have now been introduced to your part of our partnership, the
ten commandments you need to follow to decode nonverbal communica-
tion successtully. The question now becomes “What nonverbal behaviors
should I be looking for, and what important information do they re-

vealr” This 1s where I come 1n.

ldentifying Important Nonverbal Behaviors
and Their Meanings

Consider this. The human body 1s capable of giving ott literally thou-
sands of nonverbal “signals” or messages. Which ones are most impor-
tant and how do you decode them? The problem 1s that it could take a
lifetime of painstaking observation, evaluation, and validation to identify
and interpret important nonverbal communications accurately. Fortu-
nately, with the help of some very gifted researchers and my practical
experience as an FBI expert on nonverbal behavior, we can take a more
direct approach to get you on your way. I have already identitied those
nonverbal behaviors that are most important, so you can put this unique
knowledge to immediate use. We have also developed a paradigm or
model that makes reading nonverbals easier. Even 1t you forget exactly
what a specific body signal means, you will still be able to decipher it.
As you read through these pages, you will learn certain information

about nonverbal behavior that has never been revealed in any other text

--------------------------------------------------
page 32:
18 WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

on body language (including examples of nonverbal behavioral clues
used to solve actual FBI cases). Some ot the material will surprise you.
For example, it you had to choose the most “honest” part of a person’s
body—the part that would most likely reveal an individual’s true feeling
or intentions—which part would you select? Take a guess. Once I reveal
the answer, you'll know a prime place to look when attempting to decide
what a business associate, family member, date, or total stranger 1s think-
ing, feeling, or intending. I will also explain the physiological basis for
nonverbal behavior, the role the brain plays in nonverbal behavior. I will
also reveal the truth about detecting deception as no counterintelligence
agent has done before.

[ firmly believe that understanding the biological basis tor body lan-
guage will help you appreciate how nonverbal behavior works and why
it 1s such a potent predictor of human thoughts, teelings, and intentions.
Therefore, I start the next chapter with a look at that magnificent organ,
the human brain, and show how it governs every facet of our body lan-
guage. Before I do so, however, I will share an observation concerning
the validity of using body language to understand and assess human be-

havior.

FOR WHOM THE TELLS TOLL

On a fatetul date in 1963, in Cleveland, Ohio, thirty-nine-year veteran
Detective Martin McFadden watched two men walk back and forth in
front of a store window. They took turns peeking into the shop and then
walking away. Atter multiple passes, the two men huddled at the end of
the street looking over their shoulders as they spoke to a third person.
Concerned that the men were “casing” the business and intending to rob
the store, the detective moved 1n, patted down one of the men, and found
a concealed handgun. Detective McFadden arrested the three men, thus
thwarting a robbery and averting potential loss of life.

Oftficer McFadden’s detailed observations became the basis for a land-
mark U.S. Supreme Court decision (Terry v. Ohio, 1968, 392 U.S. 1)

--------------------------------------------------
page 33:
MASTERING THE SECRETS OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION 19

known to every police otticer in the United States. Since 1968, this ruling
has allowed police officers to stop and trisk individuals without a war-
rant when their behaviors telegraph their intention to commit a crime.
With this decision, the Supreme Court acknowledged that nonverbal
behaviors presage criminality if those behaviors are observed and de-
coded properly. Terry v. Ohio provided a clear demonstration of the rela-
tionship between our thoughts, intentions, and nonverbal behaviors.
Most important, this decision provided legal recognition that such a rela-
tionship exists and 1s valid (Navarro & Schater, 2003, 22-24).

So the next time someone says to you that nonverbal behavior does
not have meaning or is not reliable, remember this case, as 1t says other-

wise and has stood the test of time.

--------------------------------------------------
page 34:

--------------------------------------------------
page 35:
TWO

Living Our Limbic Legacy

ake a moment and bite your lip. Really, take a second and actually

do it. Now, rub your torehead. Finally, stroke the back of your

neck. These are things we do all the time. Spend some time
around other people and you'll see them engaging in these behaviors
on a regular basis.

Do you ever wonder why they do 1t? Do you ever wonder why you do
it? The answer can be found hidden away 1n a vault—the cranial vault—
where the human brain resides. Once we learn why and how our brain
recruits our body to express its emotions nonverbally, we’ll also discover
how to interpret these behaviors. So, let’s take a closer look 1nside that
vault and examine the most amazing three pounds of matter found 1n
the human body.

Most people think of themselves as having one brain and recognize

that brain as the seat of their cognitive abilities. In reality, there are three

--------------------------------------------------
page 36:
22 WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

“brains” inside the human skull, each performing specialized functions
that work together as the “command-and-control center” that regulates
everything our body does. Back in 1952, a pioneering scientist named
Paul Macl.ean began to speak of the human brain as a #rune brain con-
sisting of a “reptilian (stem) brain,” “mammalian (limbic) brain,” and “hu-
man (neocortex) brain” (see diagram of the limbic brain). In this book, we
will be concentrating on the limbic system of the brain (the part Macl.ean
called the mammalian brain), because it plays the largest role in the ex-
pression of our nonverbal behavior. However, we will use our neocortex
(our human brain or thinking brain) to analyze critically the limbic reac-
tions of those around us in order to decode what other people are think-
ing, feeling, or intending (LLeDoux, 1996, 184-189; Goleman, 1995,
10-21).

[t 1s critical to understand that the brain controls all behaviors, whether
conscious or subconscious. This premise 1s the cornerstone of understand-
ing all nonverbal communications. From simply scratching your head to
composing a symphony, there 1s nothing you do (except for some involun-

tary muscle retlexes) that 1s not governed or directed by the brain. By this

Fig. 3

Corpus Callosum

Neocortex

@-‘ Thalamus

Hypothalamus

Hippocampus

Amygdala

i : Cerebellum
Reptilian Brain

Diagram of the limbic brain with major features such as the amygdala and the
hippocampus.

--------------------------------------------------
page 37:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY 23

logic, we can use these behaviors to interpret what the brain 1s choosing to

communicate externally.

THE VERY ELEGANT LIMBIC BRAIN

[n our study of nonverbal communications, the limbic brain 1s where the
action 1s. Whyr Because 1t 1s the part of the brain that reacts to the world
around us reflexively and instantaneously, in real time, and without
thought. For that reason, 1t gives off a #7ue response to information com-
ing 1n from the environment (Myers, 1993, 35—39). Because 1t 1s uniquely
responsible for our survival, the limbic brain does not take breaks. It 1s
always “on.” The limbic brain 1s also our emotional center. It 1s from
there that signals go out to various other parts ot the brain, which 1n turn
orchestrate our behaviors as they relate to emotions or our survival
(LeDoux, 1996, 104—137). These behaviors can be observed and decoded
as they manitest physically in our feet, torso, arms, hands, and faces.
Since these reactions occur without thought, unlike words, they are gen-
uine. Thus, the limbic brain 1s considered the “honest brain” when we
think of nonverbals (Goleman, 1995, 13-29).

These limbic survival responses go back not only to our own intancy,
but also to our ancestry as a human species. They are hardwired into our
nervous system, making them ditticult to disguise or eliminate—Iike
trying to suppress a startle response even when we anticipate a loud
noise. | herefore, it 1s axiomatic that limbic behaviors are honest and reli-
able behaviors; they are true manifestations of our thoughts, teelings, and
intentions (see box 7).

The third part of our brain 1s a relatively recent addition to the cra-
nial vault. Thus 1t 1s called the neocortex, meaning new brain. This part
of our brain 1s also known as the “human,” “thinking,” or “intellectual”
brain, because it 1s responsible for higher-order cognition and memory.
This 1s the part of the brain that distinguishes us from other mammals
due to the large amount of its mass (cortex) used for thinking. This 1s

the brain that got us to the moon. With its ability to compute, analyze,

--------------------------------------------------
page 38:
24

WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

BOX 7: HEAD-ING OFF A BOMBER

Since the limbic part of our brain cannot be cognitively regulated, the
behaviors It generates should be given greater importance when inter-
preting nonverbal communications. You can use your thoughts to try to
disguise your true emotions all you want, but the limbic system will self-
regulate and give off clues. Observing these alarm reactions and knowing
that they are honest and significant Is extremely important; it can even
save lives.

An example of this occurred in December of 1999, when an alert
U.S. customs officer thwarted a terrorist who came to be known as the
‘millennial bomber.” Noting the nervousness and excessive sweating of
Ahmed Reesam as he entered the United States from Canada, Officer
Diana Dean asked him to step out of his car for further questioning. At
that point Reesam attempted to flee but was soon captured. In his car,
officers found explosives and timing devices. Reesam was eventually
convicted of plotting to bomb the Los Angeles Airport.

The nervousness and sweating that Officer Dean observed were reg-
ulated In the brain as a response to Immense stress. Because these [Im-
bic behaviors are genuine, Officer Dean could be confident in pursuing
Reesam, with the knowledge that her observations had detected body
language that justified further investigation. The Reesam aftair illustrates
how one’s psychological state manitests nonverbally in the body. In this
case, the limbic system of a would-be bomber—who was obviously ex-
tremely frightened by the possibility of being detected—gave away his
nervousness, despite all conscious attempts he made to hide his underly-
ing emotions. We owe Officer Dean our gratitude for being an astute ob-

server of nonverbal behavior and foiling a terrorist act.

--------------------------------------------------
page 39:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY 25

interpret, and 1ntuit at a level unique to the human species, 1t i1s our
critical and creative brain. It 1s also, however, the part of the brain that 1s
least honest; therefore, it 1s our “lying brain.” Because i1t 1s capable of
complex thought, this brain—unlike 1ts limbic counterpart—is the least
reliable of the three major brain components. This 1s the brain that can
deceve, and it deceives often (Vry, 2003, 1-17).

Returning to our earlier example, while the limbic system may compel
the millennial bomber to sweat protusely while being questioned by the
customs officer, the neocortex 1s quite capable of allowing him to lie about
his true sentiments. The thinking part of the brain, which 1s the part that
governs our speech (specifically, Broca’s area), could cause the bomber to
say, 1 have no explosives 1n the car,” should the officer inquire as to what
1s 1n his automobile, even if that claim 1s an utter falsehood. The neocor-
tex can easily permit us to tell a friend that we like her new haircut when
we, 1n fact, do not, or 1t can facilitate the very convincing statement, “I did
not have sexual relations with that woman, Ms. Lewinsky.”

Because the neocortex (the thinking brain) 1s capable of dishonesty, 1t
1s not a good source of reliable or accurate information (Ost, 2006, 259—
291). In summary, when it comes to revealing honest nonverbal behaviors
that help us read people, the limbic system 1s the holy grail of body lan-
guage. T'hus, this 1s the area of the brain where we want to focus our at-

tention.

OUR LIMBIC RESPONSES—THE THREE F’S
OF NONVERBALS

One of the classic ways the limbic brain has assured our survival as
a species—and produced a reliable number of nonverbal tells in the pro-
cess—1s by regulating our behavior when confronting danger, whether 1t
be a prehistoric man ftacing a Stone Age beast or a modern-day employee
facing a stone-hearted boss. Over the millennia, we have retained the
competent, life-saving visceral reactions of our animal heritage. In order

to ensure our survival, the brain’s very elegant response to distress or

--------------------------------------------------
page 40:
20 WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

threats, has taken three forms: freeze, flight, and fight. Like other animal
species whose limbic brains protected them 1n this manner, humans pos-
sessing these limbic reactions survived to propagate because these behav-
1ors were already hardwired 1into our nervous system.

[ am sure that many of you are tamiliar with the phrase “tight-or-tlight
response, which 1s common terminology used to describe the way in
which we respond to threatening or dangerous situations. Unfortunately,
this phrase 1s only two-thirds accurate and half-assed backward! In reality,
the way animals, including humans, react to danger occurs in the follow-
ing order: freeze, tlight, tight. If the reaction really were fight or tlight,
most of us would be bruised, battered, and exhausted much of the time.

Because we have retained and honed this exquisitely successtul pro-
cess for dealing with stress and danger—and because the resulting reac-
tions generate nonverbal behaviors that help us understand a person’s
thoughts, teelings, and intentions—it 1s well worth our time to examine

each response 1n greater detail.

The Freeze Response

A million years ago, as early hominids traversed the African savanna,
they were faced with many predators that could outrun and overpower
them. For early man to succeed, the limbic brain, which had evolved
from our animal forebearers, developed strategies to compensate for the
power advantage our predators had over us. That strategy, or first de-
fense of the limbic system, was to use the freeze response in the presence
of a predator or other danger. Movement attracts attention; by immedi-
ately holding still upon sensing a threat, the limbic brain caused us to
react in the most effective manner possible to ensure our survival. Most
animals, certainly most predators, react to—and are attracted by—
movement. This ability to freeze in the face of danger makes sense.
Many carnivores go after moving targets and exercise the “chase, trip,
and bite” mechanism exhibited by large felines, the primary predators
of our ancestors.

Many animals not only freeze their motion when contronted by preda-

--------------------------------------------------
page 41:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY 27

tors, but some even play dead, which 1s the ultimate freeze reaction. This
1s a strategy that opossums use, but they are not the only animals to do so.
In fact, accounts of the school shootings at Columbine and Virginia Tech
demonstrate that students used the treeze response to deal with deadly
predators. By holding still and playing dead, many students survived even
though they were only a few feet away from the killer. Instinctively, the
students adopted ancient behaviors that work very ettectively. Freezing
your movement can often make you nearly invisible to others, a phenom-
enon every soldier and SWA'T team operator learns.

Thus, the treeze response has been passed from primitive man to
modern man and remains with us today as our first line of defense
against a perceived threat or danger. In fact, you can still see this ancient
[imbic reaction to large felines in the theaters of L.as Vegas where big cats
are part of the show. As the tiger or lion walks onto the stage, you can be
sure that the people in the first row will not be making any unnecessary
arm or hand gestures. They will be frozen 1n their seats. These people
were not 1ssued memos to remain still; they did so because the limbic
brain has prepared the human species to behave that way in the face of
danger for over tive million years.

[n our modern society, the treeze response 1s employed more subtly in
everyday life. You can observe it when people are caught blutting or
stealing, or sometimes when they are lying. When people feel threatened
or exposed, they react just like our ancestors did a million years earlier;
they freeze. Not only have we, as humans, learned to treeze 1n the face of
observed or perceived danger, but others around us have learned to copy
our behavior and treeze their behavior also, even without seeing the
threat. This mimicry or zsopraxism (same movement) evolved because it
was critical to communal survival, as well as social harmony, within the
human species (see box 8 on next page).

This freezing action 1s sometimes termed the “deer-in-the-headlights”
ettect. When suddenly caught 1in a potentially dangerous circumstance,
we immediately treeze betore taking action. In our day-to-day life, this
freeze response manifests innocently, such as when a person walking

down the street stops suddenly, perhaps hitting himself on the forehead

--------------------------------------------------
page 42:
28 WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

BOX 8: THE NIGHT THE HANDS STOPPED MOVING

| was at my mother’s house a few weeks ago watching television and eat-
INng Ice cream with members of the family. It was late at night and some-
one rang the doorbell (something that is very unusual in her neighborhood).
Suddenly, Iin the midst of eating, everyone’'s hands froze—adults and
children alike—as It choreographed. It was amazing to see how we all
reacted with “hands flash frozen™ at precisely the same moment. It turned
out that the visitor was my sister who had forgotten her keys. But of
course we didn’'t know it was her ringing the bell. It was a beautiful ex-
ample of the hardwired communal response to perceived danger, and of
the first limbic reaction, which Is to freeze.

Soldiers in combat react the same way. When the “point man” freezes,

everyone freezes; nothing needs to be said.

with the palm of his hand, before turning around and heading back to
his apartment to turn off the stove. That momentary stop 1s enough for
the brain to do some quick assessing, whether the threat comes in the
form of a predator or of a thought remembered. Either way, the psyche
must deal with a potentially dangerous situation (Navarro, 2007, 141—
163).

We not only treeze when confronted by physical and visual threats,
but as in the example of the late-night doorbell, threats from things we
hear (aural threats) can also alert the limbic system. For instance, when
being chastised, most people hold very still. The same behavior 1s ob-
served when an individual 1s being questioned about matters that he or
she perceives could get them 1nto trouble. The person will treeze 1n his

¢

chair as if in an “ejector seat” (Gregory, 1999).

A stmilar manifestation ot the limbic treeze occurs during interviews
when people hold their breath or their breathing becomes very shallow.
Again, this 1s a very ancient response to a threat. It 1s not noticed by the

interviewee and yet it 1s quite observable to anyone watching for it. I have

--------------------------------------------------
page 43:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY 29

often had to tell an interviewee to relax and take a deep breath during
the middle of an interview or deposition, as he was unaware of just how
shallow his breathing had become.

Consistent with the need to freeze when contronted by a threat, peo-
ple being questioned about a crime will often tix their feet in a position
of security (interlocked behind the chair legs) and hold that position for
an 1nordinate period of time. When I see this type of behavior, it tells me
something 1s wrong; this 1s a limbic response that needs to be turther
explored. The person may or may not be lying, since deceit cannot be
directly discerned. But I can be assured from their nonverbal behavior
that something 1s stressing them; therefore I will pursue the source of
their discomfort through my questioning or interaction.

Another way the limbic brain uses a moditfication of the freeze re-
sponse 1s to attempt to protect us by diminishing our exposure. During
surveillance of shoplitters, one ot the things that stands out 1s how often
thieves will try to hide their physical presence by restricting their mo-
tions or hunching over as if trying to be invisible. Ironically, this makes
them stand out even further, since 1t 1s such a deviation from normal
shopping behavior. Most people walk around a store with their arms
quite active and their posture upright rather than stooped. Psychologi-
cally, the shoplitters—or, your son and daughter as they try to surrep-
titiously swipe a cookie from the pantry—are trying to master their
environment by attempting to “hide” in the open. Another way people
try to hide in the open 1s by limiting their head exposure. This 1s done by
raising the shoulders and lowering the head—the “turtle etfect.” Picture
a losing tootball team walking off the tield after the game and you get
the 1dea (see figure 4).

[nterestingly and sadly, abused children often manifest these treezing
l[imbic behaviors. In the presence of an abusive parent or adult, their
arms will go dormant at their sides and they avoid eye contact as though
that helps them not to be seen. In a way, they are hiding in the open,

which 1s a tool of survival for these helpless kids.

--------------------------------------------------
page 44:
30 WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

Fig. 4

The “turtle effect” (shoulders rise toward the
ears) Is often seen when people are humbled
or suddenly lose confidence.

The Flight Response

One purpose of the freeze response 1s to avoid detection by dangerous
predators or 1in dangerous situations. A second purpose is to give the
threatened 1ndividual the opportunity to assess the situation and deter-
mine the best course of action to take. When the freeze response 1s not
adequate to eliminate the danger or 1s not the best course ot action (e.g.,
the threat 1s too close), the second limbic response 1s to get away by use of
the flight response. Obviously, the goal of this choice 1s to escape the threat
or, at a minimum, to distance oneself from danger. Running, ot course, 1s

useful when 1t 1s practical, and as a survival mechanism our brain di-

--------------------------------------------------
page 45:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY 31

rected our body to adopt this tactic judiciously over millennia 1in order to
escape from danger.

In our modern world, however, where we live 1n cities and not in the
wild, 1t 1s difticult to run from threats; theretore we have adapted the
tlight response to meet our modern needs. The behaviors are not as obvi-
ous, but they serve the same purpose—to either block or distance our-
selves from the physical presence of undesirable individuals or things.

[t you think back on the social interactions you've had in your life,
you ll probably be able to recall some of the “evasive” actions you took to
distance yourself from the unwanted attention of others. Just as a child
turns away from undesirable food at the dinner table and shifts her feet
toward the exit, an individual may turn away from someone she doesn’t
like, or to avoid conversations that threaten her. Blocking behaviors may
manifest in the form of closing the eyes, rubbing the eyes, or placing the
hands 1n front of the face.

The person may also distance herselt from someone by leaning away,
placing objects (a purse) on her lap, or turning her feet toward the near-
est exit. All of these behaviors are controlled by the limbic brain and
indicate that someone wants distance from one or more undesirable
persons or any perceived threat in the environment. Again, we under-
take these behaviors because, for millions of years, humans have with-
drawn from things we didn’t like or that could harm us. Therefore, to
this day, we expedite our exit from a deplorable party, distance ourselves
from a bad relationship, or lean away from those who are deemed unde-
sirable or even with whom we strongly disagree (see figure 5).

Just as a man may turn away from his date, an individual in negotia-
tions may shift away tfrom his counterpart it he hears an unattractive
offer or feels threatened as bargaining continues. Blocking behaviors
may also be manifested; the businessperson may close or rub his eyes, or
place his hands 1n tront of his face (see figure 6). He may lean away
from the table or the other person and turn his feet away as well, some-
times 1n the direction of the nearest exit. These are not behaviors of de-
ception, but rather actions that signal that a person feels uncomfortable.

These forms of the age-old flight response are distancing nonverbal be-

--------------------------------------------------
page 46:
32 WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

People lean away from each other subconsciously when
they disagree or feel uncomfortable around each other.

haviors that tell you the businessperson 1s unhappy with what is occur-

ring at the table.
The Fight Response

The fight response 1s the limbic brain’s tinal tactic for survival through
aggression. When a person contronting danger cannot avoid detection by
freezing and cannot save himselt by distancing or escaping (flight), the
only alternative left 1s to fight. In our evolution as a species, we—along
with other mammals—developed the strategy of turning fear into rage

in order to fight off attackers (Panksepp, 1998, 208). In the modern

--------------------------------------------------
page 47:
LIVING OUR LIMBIC LEGACY 33

Fig. 6

Eye blocking is a very powerful display of
consternation, disbelief, or disagreement.

world, however, acting on our rage may not be practical or even legal, so
the limbic brain has developed other strategies beyond the more primi-
tive physical tight response.

One form of modern aggression 1s an argument. Although the origi-
nal meaning of the term argument relates simply to a debate or discus-
ston, the word 1s increasingly used to describe a verbal altercation. An
overheated argument 1s essentially “fighting” by nonphysical means. The
use of insults, ad hominem phrases, counterallegations, denigration of
professional stature, goading, and sarcasm are all, in their own ways, the
modern equivalents of fighting, because they are all forms of aggression.
[t you think about 1t, civil lawsuits can even be construed as a modern
and socially sanctioned type of tight or aggression in which litigants ag-
gressively argue two opposing viewpoints.

While humans probably engage in physical altercations far less now
than 1n other periods in our history, tfighting 1s still a part of our limbic
armory. Although some people are more prone to violence than others,
our limbic response shows up 1n many ways other than punching, kick-
ing, and biting. You can be very aggressive without physical contact, for

example, just by using your posture, your eyes, by puffing out your chest,

--------------------------------------------------
page 48:
34 WHAT EVERY BODY IS SAYING

or by violating another’s personal space. Threats to our personal space
elicit a limbic response on an individual level. Interestingly, these territo-
rial violations can also create limbic responses on a collective level. When
one country intrudes 1nto the space of another, it often results in economic
sanctions, severing of diplomatic relations, or even wars.

Obviously, 1t 1s easy to recognize when someone uses the fight re-
sponse to commit a physical assault. What I want to identity for you are
the not-so-obvious ways 1in which individuals exhibit some of the more
subtle behaviors associated with the fight response. Just as we have seen
modified expressions of the freeze and flight limbic reactions, modern
decorum dictates that we refrain from acting on our primitive inclina-
tions to fight when threatened.

In general, I advise people to retrain from using aggression (verbal or
physical) as a means of achieving their objectives. Just as the tight response
1s the act of last resort in dealing with a threat—used only after the treeze
and flight tactics have proven unworkable—so too should you avoid 1t
whenever feasible. Aside from the obvious legal and physical reasons for
this recommendation, aggressive tactics can lead to emotional turmoil,
making it ditticult to concentrate and think clearly about the threatening
situation at hand. When we are emotionally aroused—and a good tight
will do that—it atfects our ability to think effectively. This happens be-
cause our cognitive abilities are hijacked so that the limbic brain can have
full use of all available cerebral resources (Goleman, 1995, 27, 204—-207).
One of the best reasons for studying nonverbal behaviors 1s that they can
sometimes warn you when a person intends to harm you physically, giv-

ing you time to avoid a potential conflict.

COMFORT/DISCOMFORT AND PACIFIERS

To borrow a phrase trom the old Star Trek series, the “prime directive” ot
the limbic brain 1s to ensure our survival as a species. It does this by being
programmed to make us secure by avoiding danger or discomfort and

seeking satety or comtort whenever possible. It also allows us to remem-

--------------------------------------------------
